# OCR (Tesseract, 200 dpi) — source: mirage_dsk-1_musicians_manual.pdf

--- Page 1 ---



--- Page 2 ---

Whin Ul 0 Fils, Réad Ye Mantel...

If you're like most of us, you've’probably already hooked up your Mirage” and reached
soine level of limited suceess in making it work This manual is # simple and straightforward
presentation of the Mirage that will take you to an /ntermediate level of sophistication. An
Advanced Sampler’s Guide is available from your authorized Ensonig Dealer for those
who wish to use the Mirage in technically and artistically complex situations.

We suggest that you read the manual from front to back covers; including the GLOSSARY
and APPENDIX. The terminology may seem abit unfamiliar to you at first, but ay you use
the Mirage you'll quickly adapt to the terms and their definitions, The Mirage is a very. logi
cal instrument and weve presented the information about it in a logical building block
fashion,

a eousesmumneseresecemunsecesmessiotih About the Manual 1 sgiwmnsnesiensese aeisaias Playback Parameters
Os SaaS i wsnerarecaee ACen Introduction TS ceswinapniennesuarsioas re soee tines Changing Parameters
Bsemresereineeyvieisipie sole sieges eeeeese > The Front Panel 10 serene ma CE rere ater Saving Sounds
Bsivancom smears crapeeanenes ae All About Diskettes i cree Modifying Programs
T SSnuisnyee PSs a Mee Inputs and Outputs eee «... Sampling
8 iwesnuaesresnews eangnete Sree Getting Ready to Play .... Getting Ready to Sample
sunscreen AA INOREG TENS Changing Sounds 20 srarplere eases Hee Single Wavesample Wavetables
TD scopes + cae Re SoayRSEe Keme oce=aeeed Changing Programs Bh icmamcsvicaawesye Multiple Wavesample Wavetables
I sama a RUSH eS ae - + The Sequencer BE mewn ASHES RESET .» «MIDE Connections
P comcereraneseee=stiee . Sequencer Overdubs BA LS eemcRCeTeS TOS covawe ee sGlossary
Bh cearwsinmnaeny . Saving and Loading Sequences AG sc ciniaee EPSRCEEETE SEER Parameter Appendix

Page: 2/ The: Mancal

--- Page 3 ---

The Mirage is an eight-voice polyphonic digital sampling keyboard
instrument —in many ways similar {o and in just-as many ways
different from a synthesizer, The Mirage allows you to personally
program sounds and also features an on-board sequencer, like many
synthesizers, But in addition, the Mirage will permit you io sample
just about any sound you hear and create music with it,

It's best described as a comiputer specially designed to reproduce:and
Process sound, Like all computers, it is a system consisting of two
main parts—hardware and software, And here's where it differs
most from synthesizers.

LMiaikliipe

Hardware
‘The hardware of the Mirage is everthing that comes in the box with
the exception of the information on the mini-diskettes. The hardware
itself cannot make any sound. It’s an engine without fuel. What the
hardware can do is reproduce. process and modify the sound
information included on the diskettes.

Software

‘The information contained on the minivdiskettes is called software.
This information consists of all the data necessary for the Mirage
hardware to reproduce a sound. When this information is transferred
—or loaded into the memory of the Mirage, the hardware is ready
to reproduce that sound or modify it ina nearly unlimited number
of ways.

You, the user, can create your own-software by taking sounds you
have recorded with the Mirage hardware and transferring that infor-
mation onto a specially formatted Mirage diskette for future use. This
process is called saving.

Because all of the crucial sound information is included as software,
your Mirage will never be obsolete. An ever-growing library of
sounds and enhanced features is available from Ensoniq that will
keep your Mirage fresh and new for years w come.

Digital Sampling

AS it applies to music, digital sampling is a computer term that
basically means “recording”. In concept, it’s very similar to tape
recording —an electronic representation of a sound. or audio signal.
iS written down in some location where it can be read and changed
back into a sound at some future time,

‘Tape recording uses audio tape to swore the audio signal. Digital
sampling uses sophisticated circuitry (and eventually computer
diskettes) to store the signal, In digital sampling, the signal is stored
as bits of computer information, While in this digital form, the signal
can he modified in many ways, without deteriorating the audio
quality and without the mechanical limitations of tape recording.

introduction / Page 3

--- Page 4 ---

The Mirage control pane! contains 2 logical array of multi-function buttons and
a status display that will show you all you need to know about what's going on
inside the Mirage at any given time.

Many modem digital and digital ‘analog ‘synthesizers utilize a multi-function
control panel, so you may already be familiar with its use. If not, you ll find
that you'll adapt to the concept rather quickly and you'll soon be. breezing
across the panel like an expert.

The following sections of the manual will give you detailed instructions on how
to use the panel for specific functions. Here is a general description of the con

trols and their function,

]

Page’4/ The Front Panel

@ CONTROL
This section of the panel contains the display
and controls parameter values, switching func-
tions and: commands.

@ DISPLAY
‘The display is alpha-numeric, that is, capable
of displaying letters as well-as numbers) When
sampling, the display also functions.as a peak

level indicator, The APPENDIX of the manual

contains all the specific information about
reading and interpreting the display. Any
flashing display means that the Mirage is
asking you a question or telling you that
something is wrong,

@ PARAM
Pressing this button will show you which
parameter is cued and ready to be worked
with. Parameter numbers can be changed
using the SELECT keypad.

@ PARAM INDICATOR
When this LED is lit, the display is showing a
parameter number.

--- Page 5 ---

@ VALUE
Shows the value number of the parameter.
Rather than knobs or switches, the Mirage
uses a scale of numbers to describe the oper-
ating range of any of the parameters.

@® VALE INDICATOR
When this LED is lit, the display is showing
the value of the selected parameter.

@ w —orF
Pressing this button will decrease the param-
eter value number, Pressing the button inter-
mittently will decrease the value one digit at a
time. Holding the button down will change the
value at an accelerating rate, This is also the
OFF button for switching functions,

@® A—On
Pressing this button will increase the param-
eter value number. Pressing the button inter-
miittently will increase the value one digit at a
time. Holding the button down will increase
the value at am accelerating rate. This is also
the ON button for switching functions,

@ SELECT
The SELECT section gives you access to. many
Mirage functions from parameter selection to.
programming, sequencer, sampling and edit
functions

NUMERIC KEYPAD

the numeric keypad is used to select param

eters, sounds, patches and determine which
sounds and patches will be transferred w the
diskette,

@ CANCEL/STOP ;
This button is used to abort commands and
halt functions such as sequencing, It is also
used 10 cancel editing functions before they
are catered into the Mirage memory. Virtually
any-command or function can be cancelled
with no harmful effect as long ay CANCEL/
STOP is pressed before the event occurs.

G@® 0/PROG
Each sound. in the Mirage has four preset
Parameter programs numbered | through 4.
This key will display the current program and
keyboard half containing that program, Press-
ing the button repeatedly will alternately show
the. current program on the other keyboard
half. Pressing the button and then any
number between 1 and 4 will change the pro-
gram to that number for that keyboard half.

@ ENTER/START
This button is used to-begin the transfer of
sounds between the Mirage memory and
diskettes, to execute commands and to initiate
sampling and sequencer functions. Any com-
mand or function which dramatically alters
the Mirage memory or diskette information
will require you to press ENTER /START for
final confirmation.

@ SEN
The buttons in the sequencer section arc used
in conjunction with the start and stop buttons
in the select section to record sequences,
playback sequences, load sequences from
diskettes into the Mirage memory and. save
sequences on diskettes.

@ Ree
This button is used to record and overduh
sequetices. Pressing the button twice will
record a new sequence. while pressing the
REC burton followed by the PLAY button will
permit overdubbing a previous sequence.

@ PLAY
To play back a sequence, press the PLAY but-
ton and the sequence will play back-as:
recorded. The sequence can be interrupted at
any time by pressing the CANCEL/STOP
button.

@ LOAD
To load a sequence from a diskette into the
Mirage memory, press the LOAD button and
then the number of the sequence (1-8) you
wish to load, Pressing the ENTER/ START
button will start the loading process.

@ SWE
Yo save a sequence you have recorded by
transferring it from the Mirage memory to
diskette. fist insert an-Ensoniq Formatted
Diskette into the drive: Then press the SAVE
button. and the location number (1-8 on
SELECT keypad) where you wish to store the
sequence on the diskette. Pressing the ENTER /
START button will begin the saving process:

@ LOAD UPPER/LOWER
These buttons are used ty load sounds from
Ensoniq Sound Diskettes or your own sound
library, Pressing cither or both hunons will
instruct the Mirage to load the sounds into
the memory for the upper. lower or both
halves of the keyboard. After pressing the
load button(s), select the sound you wish to
load (1, 2, or 4) and then press
ENTER/START.

@ SAMPLE UPPER/LOWER

These buttons are used to set np the Mirage
to sample sounds, Consult the SAMPLING sec:
tion of the manual for detailed instructions.

The, Front Panel! Page S

--- Page 6 ---

The Mirage uses 342” micro floppy diskettes to store
information. The diskettes are enclosed in a protective plas-
ti¢ carrier with an automatic shatter to protect the diskette
from physical damage It is important not to-alter this
carrier in any way,

Ensoniq Sound Diskettes aré shipped “‘write-protected”,
that is. protected against accidental erasure while in the
Mirage disk drive We recommend that you do not store
sounds on a Sound Diskette without first making a backup
copy of the Sound Diskette on an Enseniq Formatted
Diskette, Formatted diskettes contain the Mirage operating
system data, but do not contain any sound information.
They can store up to three sounds with four programs
each, and up to eight 333-note sequences. Note: In order
to save sounds and sequences and make backup copies of
Sound Diskettes, you must use Ensoniq Formatted
Diskettes. Blank, unformatted and diskettes formatted for
other systems: will not work in the Mirage.

Formatted diskettes have a sliding write-protection tah, so
that you can protect your own sounds and programs
against accidental erasure. Sliding the red write protection
tab in the fower left corner of the diskette so that the
window is closed will allow you to store information on the
diskette, Sliding the red tab so that the window is open
will protect the diskette against over-writing and erasure.

Page 6/ Diskettes

' Diskettes should not be left in the disk drive

00'S AND DON'TS

Diskettes are a magnetic storage medium and should he
treated with the same care that you'd give important audio
tapes. Here are a few specifi do's and don'ts.

© Keep diskettes away from magnetic fields. Exposure to
magnetic energy can permanently damage the information
on the diskette. Keep them away from speaker cabinets,
tape decks, power cables, airline v-ray equipment, power
amplifiers, IV sets.and any other source of magnetic energy.
* Avoid extremes of temperature, ‘femiperatures below

50° F and above [40° F can damage the plastic carrier,

© Keep the carrier ean. Don't allow liquids to come in
contact with the carrier or diskette and don’t touch the
diskette ‘with your fingers.

© We strongly advise that you keep a written cecord of the
sounds, programs and sequences stored on your diskettes
to facilitate loading the right sounds and to avoid writing
over sounds and sequences you want tw save, For maxi-
mum protection, always make back-up copies of your
diskettes on Ensoniq Formatted Diskettes, available from
your authorized Ensoniq dealer.

‘when the Mirage ts switched on or switched off.
Diskettes should not be inserted or removed while t
the red disk drive light is on.

--- Page 7 ---

The back panel of the Mirage contains inputs and outputs for power, audio
Signal and interface connections. Several of these connections have multiple
functions that are controlled by parameters from the front panel Consult the

Appendia for a complete description of the parameters.

@ POWER

Rocker switch to turn power on and off.
‘@ UNE

110 - [20VAC GDII2 - l0Amp Type SIT heavy
duty detachable 2 meter cord with molded
3 prong plug.

@ EXTERNAL FUSE HOLDER

®

®

External holder for 2.5Amp Fast Blow fuse.
AUDIO OUT

Low impedance, high gain audio output. Nom.
output 800m. Impedance 600 ohms.

AUDIO IN

Audio: input switchable between line and mic
levels. Parameter 75 (LINE INPUT ON, OFF) con-
trols the level select. The line fevel input will

accept signals of up to 1), impedance 10K ohmis.
The mic level input will accept signals of up to
100mV. impedance 20K ohms.

@ EXPANSION PORT

This isa connection for future Mirage expan
sion products and external computers. tilling
our and-mailing the warranty card will assure
that you are notified of expansion modules as
they become available, DO NOT CONNECT ANY
EQUIPMENT TO THIS PORT UNLESS IT HAS
BEEN SPECIFICALLY DESIGNED FOR USE WITH
THE MIRAGE. SERIOUS DAMAGE TO EITHER
OR BOTH UMTS CAN RESULT.

MID! OUT/THRU

‘This jack sends out MIDI information from
the Mirage to other instruments and compu-
ters. In the MIDI THRU MODE (parameter
83), it alse: echoes all MIDI inputs

MIDI IN

‘The input for standard Musical Instrument
Digital Interface (MIDI) information, The
MIDI IN jack is controlled by parameter 81
(MIDI OMNI MODE ON/OFF), and parameter
82 (MIDI CHANNEL SELECT)

@ SEQUENCER SYNC IN

input for external clock source (sequencer,
drum machine rhythm unit), Input function is
controlied by parameter 85 (EXTERNAL
SEQUENCER CLOCK) and parameter 86
CENTERNAL SEQUENCER CLOCK JACK), NOTE:
Externally synced units may also he connected
through the MIDI IN jack.

@ PEDAL/FOOTSWITCH

This connection is for the optional Pedal/
footswitch and is controlled by parameter 8%)
(SUSTAIN PEDAL/ FOOTSWITCH SELECT),

The: great majority of problems with any
electronic instrument are in the connec
tions. Il is only wise to use high quality
cables and connectors and lo keep them in
good condition, We also recommend that
you double check all connections every time
yOu set the Mirage up to, play.

Inputs and. Outputs! Page 7

--- Page 8 ---

|

Getting Feady p> Flaup

‘The Mirage is a two-part instrument —hardware and software, By itself, the
hardware won't make a Sound. It needs the information on the diskettes to
start doing its work. Getting this information into the right location in the

hardware is known as Loading.

When you turn the Mirage on-and insert a diskette, the hardware will automat-
ically load sound #1 and its four programs into the memory. You will have to
follow a certain procedure when you wish to change sounds or diskettes. The
procedure is quite simple and only takes:a few seconds, Here's the complete

sequence.

ip

WHEN TURNING ON THE MIRAGE

Here's what's happening, . .

Turn power switch ON

‘The electrical power that operates the hardware

is ready,

nd (no diskette) s ¢
Flashing
Pa ~

i Insert Sound Diskette

Push the diskette drive button in to open the slot.
Hold the diskette with the arrow on top. facing
forward, and insert in gently into the drive slot until it

seats fully in and down.

Display blank
Drive light on

Wait about 15 seconds

The operational and sound information is now being

transferred from the diskette to the hardware

memory. Slight mechanical sounds will be heard

coming from the drive,

21 (MASTER
TUNE)
This paraineter

will always show after the

Page 8/ Getting Ready to Play

first sound is loaded.

--- Page 9 ---

CHANGING SOUNDS

Once the Mirage is. in this state, there is a slightly dif-
ferent procedure to change sounds, cither loaded from
the same diskette or from a different diskette,

Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show...
Press LOAD button(s) either Before loading the actual sound information, you LU (load upper)
UPPER, LOWER or both must select whether the sound will be available On or

the upper half of the keyboard, the lower half,
or the entire keyboard,

LL (load lower)
or LA (load all).
Flashing

7
XN
Press 1, 2 or 3 0n SELECT Each diskette has three sounds. Refer to the diskette 7

LI (load 1) or
keypad label for a description of each,

[2 (load 2) or
L3 (load 3).
(Flashing )

“t Li
ye
~

I j
a

a" CANCEL/STOP If you change your mind about which sound you wish Previous param:
vn 8 | to load, press CANCEL/STOP and begin again. eter belore
ed & } OR pressing load
soe ae button.

Press: ENTER START

This will initiate the transfer of information from the
diskette to the Mirage memory.

Display blank
Drive light on

Wait a maximum of 15 seconds

NOTE

Loading a sound into the memory of both halves of
the keyboard will take a maximum, of 15 éeconds.

If there is no sound stored for the number you have
selected, the display will flash.

When the process
has been com-
pleted, the number
of the last used
parameter will
display,

~“ 7
NF (not found)
ie ~

Press any key. Adjust volume

All the sound inforaiation is now in the hardware
memory. You can now play the sound as loaded or pro
ceed to modify it using any of the playback parameters

Changing Sounds! Page 9

--- Page 10 ---

CHANGING PROGRAMS AND KEYBOARD HALVES

Each sound loaded into the Mirage memory carries four
distinct parameter programs along with it, Those pro-
grams will always be based on the primary sound. For
example, the four programs of the piano sound will be
different, but they will all be piano sounds.

Here's the procedure for changing programs.

Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show...
Press 0/ PROG This will show you the current program and the L(1, 2)3:or 4) for 7
cs keyboard half it is applied to, the lower keyboard, L H
Bi: Flashing ~

Serer

Press ()/ PROG again Pressing 0/PROG a second time will show the
program for the other keyboard half.

UC, 2, 3 oF 4) for
the upper keyboard

Press 1, 2, 3 of 4 00 You are now telling the Mirage to change to the
SELECT keypad desired program for that keyboard half,

UG, 2. 3 or 4)

Selecting parameter 25 (UPPER/LOWER PROGRAM LINK) and switch.
ing it ON will connect the program select switch to both keyboard
halves. So as you change the program for one keyboard half the otber

will change automatically.

Page 10) Changing Programs

--- Page 11 ---

‘The Mirage features a 333-note sequencer that willvallow you to record and

save patterns and songs: Operating very much like a sound-on-sound tape

recorder. the sequencer enables you to build up patterns and songs by over-

dubbing previous: sequences.

Ensoniq offers a Mirage Sequencer Expander Cartridge which increases the
capacity of the sequencer by 1024 events. This cartridge plugs into the
expansion port at the rear of the Mirage and is.a simple way to upgrade your %

Sequences can be stored on Ensoniq Formatted Diskettes,

Before using the sequencer, we suggest you review the sequencer parameters in &9

Param, Function ,

5 EXTERNAL SEQUENCER
CLOCK SWITCH
EXTERNAL CLOCK JACK SELECT
by INTERNAL CLOCK RATE
a8 SEQUENCER LOOP SWITCH
SUSTAIN PEDAL/FOOTSWITCH

the APPENDIX. Take particular note of the following: SELECT
TO RECORD A NEW SEQUENCE
Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show...

Press REC button

Turns the sequencer on to standby and is awaiting

TS (record-sequence}

further instructions Hashing rc a
Press REC button You're now telling the sequencer that this is a new ms Bs
(2nd time) Sequence. Note that any sequence in the Mirage Not flashing

memory will be erased as the new sequence is entered.
Play any key Any of these “events” will start the recording Sr (sequence

Press START button
Move PITCH WHE!
Move MOD WHEEL

process. All notes, kev velocity and PITCH and
MOD WHEEL changes will be recorded. Any
delay between the first “event” and the first key played

cording) cC
recording 5

Press FOOTSWITCH will also be: recorded.

(param 89 “on )

External Clock

Press: STOP Sequencer will stop recording and end the sequence (last parameter
—OR— at this point, number used)

Press PLAY The sequencer will stop recording and immediately 24 —The initial
—OR— begin to play the sequence from the beginning. value of param, 87

Footswitch (with Parameter
89 on)

Press Aor Ww

You may now accompany the playback without
recording further.

You can speed up or-slow down the playback of the
sequence by changing this parameter value. Increasing
the number will increase the tempo, decreasing the
number will slow:down the tempo.

INTERNAL CLOCK
RATE

Display shows new
value of internal
clock. rate,

The: Sequencer/Page tt

--- Page 12 ---

TO OVERDUB A SEQUENCE

Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show ., .

Press REC The sequencer is turned on to standby fS (record sequence } a
and is awaiting further instructions. Flashing > se
The previously recorded sequence will begin to play od (overdub) j
back immediately and any notes you play will be over oid

dubbed on top of the previous sequence, You can con te
tinue to add overdubs until the memory is filled. Note

that adding pitch bend or modulation will affect all pre-

viously recorded tracks. and will use sequence memory

as do getes. Also, Mirage is an-cight voice instrument,

So No more than 8 notes cunsolind at any one time

Overdubbing with the LOOP SWITCH “on™

With the LOOP SWITCH “on™, the sequence will continue to play again
and again. with subsequent overdubs layering on top of the previously
played notes. This will continue until the STOP buttonas pressed,

Overdubbing with the LOOP SWITCH “off”
With the LOOP SWITCIE “off”, the sequence will play through once while
overdubbing and then stop automatically,

SAVING A SEQUENCE om

Recorded sequences can be saved for posterity on Ensoniq Sound and Formatted
Dixkettes. Each diskette can store 8 short sequences (without Expander
Cartridge ) of three long sequences (with Expander Cartridge}. We highly
recommend that you keep a written record of sequence names and their
locations to help you find them more easily in the future and to avoid
inadvertenily recording over them. When the Sequencer Expander Cartridge

is used, cach long sequence saved will erase.two or more short sequences.
Consult the Expander Cartridge instructions for details,

Page 12/Sequencer Qvertuns

--- Page 13 ---

TO SAVE A SEQUENCE

Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show...
Press. SAVE The sequencer is preparing to transter all recorded SS (save sequence) ™ 4
sequence information to diskette. Flashing a o
4 “
] Press any button You are now choosing the location an the diskette S$ (1-28)
| 1—8 on that the sequence will be transferred to. NOTE: Keep - |
| SELECT keypad a written record of sequences and their locations, ai
|
Press ENTER The sequence information is now being transferred Blank (disk drive
| To the assigned location on the diskvtte. light on)
j NOTE; Any sequence previously saved in that Ingation
will be erased.
LOADING A SEQUENCE

A sequence stored on diskette can he loaded into the Mirage sequencer memory
in much the same manner thal it was saved The sequvace will play using what-
ever sound is currently loaded into the Mirage.

Note that any-sequence in the Mirage internal sequencer memory will be erased
when the new sequence is loaded from the diskette

TO LOAD A SEQUENCE

Do this... Here's what's happening. .. Display will show...
Press LOAD ‘The Mirage is now prepared ta réceive sequence LS (load sequence) 7
information from the diskette into the internal memory. Flashing
™
Presy desired sequence You are now telling the Mirage which sequence LOL, 8)
number | to 8 on information from the diskette you wish to load,

SELECT keypad

Press ENTER The sequence information is now being transferred
from the diskette to the Mirage sequencer memory.

Blank (Disk
drive light on)

\
c~ ir
Cow

NOTE: /f there is no. sequence stored in the localion you've chosen. the
display will flash nf” (not found).

Saving and Loading Sequences! Page 13

--- Page 14 ---

Rather. than have knobs, faders and switches to control functions.
the Mirage uses multi-function pushbuttons and a digital display
to control the parameters of playing and sampling. Simply put. a
parameter is-# variable for a specific function, Tuning, keyboard
halunce, filter cutoff frequency and sampling time are cxamples of
individual parameters,

The parameters of the Mirage are divided into two iain cate-
gorics — playback parameters and sampling parameters. The play-
back parameters have to do with modifying or cahancing a’sound
that's already in the Mirage memory. The sampling parameters
deal with getting the sound from its source into the Mirage
memory. We'll save the sampling parameters for later on in the
manual and just talk about the playhack parameters here.

HOW TO USE THE CONTROL PANEL

In order to work with the-parameters, you ll need some familiari
zation with the control panel. Since all parameter changes are
made using the same pushbuttoils, you'll only aye to learn the
procedure once

First, here are Some Mifage parameter basics:

© Pressing the PARAM button will always display the current
parameter qumber. Refer to the parameter list in the manual or
the parameter card to find out what each parameter does,

© Parameter numbers can be changed only by keying the number
on the SELECT keypad All parameters are two-digit numbers.
After you enter the first digit, the dispiay will show a flashing “L”
or “U", indicating which keyboard half the parametcr applies to.
The “L” or “U” will be replaced by the second parameter digit as.
you enter it.

© Pressing the VALUE button will show you the current numeric
vajue or status of the curremt parameter.

© The value can be changed only by pressing the “AV” or “Ne”
buttons below the display, When the parameter is a switch func-
tion, these are the “ON-OFF” buttons, ,

© While in the parameter mode, the parameter LED will be fit
Pressing the “AX” or “~" button will-automatically switch to the
value mode, While in the value mode, the value LED will be lit.

Page 14 Playback Parameters

Pressing any numeric hutton on the SELECT keypad will automati-
cally switeh to the parameter mode,

© Pressing the “A” or “\" buttons intermittently will change: the
value one digit at a time. Holding the button down will cause the
value to change at an accelerating rate. This will give you both
coarse and fine control.

© In order to hear the change in sound made by 4 parameter
value, il is necessary to playa new note after each value change.
A recommended procedure is to play one key repeatedly while
changing the parameter value.

© A complete description of all playback parameters is found in
the APPENDIX.

© Parameter values are not constant. The values will have a
differeat. meaning for nearly every parameter. For example. the
MASTER TUNE parameter values are 100 steps (0-99) of 1/20
semitone each, while VELOCITY SENSITIVITY values are 32-steps
(0-31) which merely describe the minimum and maximum sensi-
tivity limits.

* Parameters 11-19 are command parameters. They tell the
Mirage to perform specific functions, such as saving @ particular
program or sound, and Have no numeric value. Command
parameters will always require you to press ENTER//STAR' to con-
firm the command, or CANCEL/STOP to abort it. After executing
the command, the Mirage will display the parameter number.

--- Page 15 ---

SELECTING AND CHANGING A PARAMETER
Here's a quick rundown of the general procedure.

Do this... Here's what's happening . - . Display will show...

Press PARAM button The Mirage ts prepared to modify any one of the The number of the

parameters. last used parameter.
PARAM LED lit.

Enter parameter number You're now telling the Mirage which parameter Parameter
om SELECT keypad, Press you wish to work with number
2-then 1, (20-99)

Press VALUE button The Mirage will show you the current value of ui Current value
parameter number, Value
LED Tit.

The value number
will increase or
decrease.

For numeric values
Press AW orw

‘The Mirage will adjust the value of the parameter
up or down as much as you wish.

| For switeh functions
J Press ON or OFF

The Mirage will electronically and noisclessly switch
the function,

GENERAL PARAMETERS

There-are four general playback parameters— MASTER TUNE,
PITCH BEND RANGE, KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSITIVITY and KEY-

on OF OF es
o\ngow
23/KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSITIVITY

The KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSITIVITY will automatically set itself
(default) to the touch of the average player (VALUE 8). Players

BOARD BALANCE. These parameters will always apply to the
entire keyboard You needn't adjust them every time you turn the
Mirage on —they will automatically come up as default values.
For example, MASTER TUNE will he 440, PITCH BEND RANGE
will be a minor 3rd up and down, KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSI-
TIVITY will be set for the average touch and KEYBOARD BALANCE
will set equal levels for the upper-and lower halves

21/MASTER TUNE

The MASTER TUNE will automatically set itself (default) to Ai40
(VALUE 50), It is adjustable over a five semitone range in incre-
ments of 1/20 semitone.
22/PITCH BEND RANGE
The PITCH BEND RANGE will automatically set itself (default) to
a minor $rd (VALUE 8). It is adjustable over a two octave range,

(one octave up, One octave down) in increments of 1/20
semitone,

with a heavier than average touch should use the lower values
and players with a light touch should use the higher values.

24/KEYBOARD BALANCE

The KEYBOARD BALANCE will automatically set equal levels for
the upper and lower halves of the keyboard (VALUE $0). The
parameter works very much like 2 pan pot with the higher
numbers favoring the upper keyhoard and lower numbers favoring
the lower keyboard,

Changing Parameters / Page. 15

--- Page 16 ---

: As with a synthesizer, any sound you load into the Mirage can be modified

extensively using the playback parameters. Before too long (probably later this
evening), you'll want to save the programs you've personally created. To do
myn? that, you'll need an Ensonig Formatted Diskette.

M Yi Ensonig Sound Diskettes are shipped write protected to eliminate the possibil-
ity of erasing any of the sound information. Also included with your Mirage is
4 backup of the Sound Diskette that is not write protected, We suggest that
you use the backup and keep the Sound Diskette in a safe place. Additional
backup copies can be made on Ensoniq Formatted Diskettes by following the
procedures for saving sounds outlined in this section. Formatted diskettes can
store up to three sounds, with four programs. per sound,
Here’s how to go about saving your sounds.

SAVING A SOUND ON AN ENSONIQ FORMATTED DISKETTE Teed
Each sound on an Ensoniq Sound Diskette carries four programs with it Once
a sound is loaded into the Mirage memory, any or all of the programs can be
modified. When you've modified the programs to your satisfaction, insert an
Ensoniq Formatted Diskette and do the following:

4

Do this... Here’s what's happening... Display will show...
Select parameter You're telling the Mirage which keyboard half SL (save lower \ a /
11/'SAVE LOWER (or both) to save. sound) ke H
12/SAVE UPPER SU (save upper a
13/SAVE BOTH sound)

SA (save both)
Enter 1, 2 or 3 on You're telling the Mirage which location on the $1 (sound 1) :
SELECT keypad diskette you want the sound transferred to. $2 (sound 2)

$3 (sound 3)

Press ENTER All the information about the sound and programs Display blank
will now transfer to the assigned location on the Drive light on
diskette.

comes back on, the transfer of information has been
completed, Remove and label the diskette.

LABEL THE DISKETTE When the drive light goes’ out and the display 13 (save both)
RD

Page 16/ Saving Sounds

--- Page 17 ---

COPYING PROGRAMS INTERNALLY

It's not unusual to want to modify 4 program, yet still retain the original. For
example, let's say that you're not too fond of piano program #4 and would
like to havea modified copy of piano program #1 in its place, while still
retaining the original program #1,

‘The Mirage will allow you to copy from program #1 into the #4 location. You
can then modify it, ending up with programs #1, 2 and 3 intact and #4 as
your personal modification of #1, Here's how w do it.

Do this... Here's what's happening...

Display will show . . .

Select parameter
15/COPY PROGRAM ‘10 LOWER or
16/COPY PROGRAM TO UPPER

You are preparing the Mirage to copy the current
program into another location. In our case we will
be copying the lower program #1 into the lower
program #4 location,

LC (lower copy)
OR

LC (upper copy)

Flashing

=——sater oF

x

‘%S

Press 4 on You aré now telling the Mirage the location into
SELECT KEYPAD which you will copy the current (#1) program.
aces Press ENTER ‘The Mirage is now duplicating the program parameters
ea of program #1 into the program #4 location.
=

You can now create a2 new program #4 by changing anv or all of the playback
parameters, When you've finished your programming session, you are ready to
save the entire sound on diskette in the previously outlined manner,

L4 (to lower 4)
OR i 1
U4 (to upper 4)

15 or 16 F
(the copy bi
parameter)

Modifying Progrants/ Page 17

--- Page 18 ---

Sampling your own sounds with the Mirage is where the fun. really begins. Just about any sound can he a
source of inspiration for you, since just about any sound can be recorded and processed with the Mirage.
Acoustic sounds can be sampled using a microphone while electronic or recorded sounds can be connected

— Lee directly to the Mirage.
As you become more familiar with the Mirage and the sampling process, you'll begin to realize that your
creative possibilitics are limited only by your imagination. First, here's a litte background to help you
understand the process better.
DIGITAL RECORDING Playing the sound back*is a matter of reversing the available for each; This reduces the actual time available

As we hear them, sounds are energy patterns. In the
air, this energy moves the parts of our cars, creating
electrical impulses that our brains can decipher. In tape
recording, this energy moves some part of a micro
phone, creating electrical impulses that-are recorded
electromagnetically on magnetic tape.

In digital recording, the electrical impulses that repre-
sent the sound are converted into information that is
recorded in a computer memory

The analog signal becomes 2 digital signal in the Analog,
Digital Converter (ADC). The ADC is a sophisticated,
Imagine, if you will, standing at the seaside with «
ruler, stopwatch. pad and pencil. Now think of measur-
ing the height of the incoming waves with the ruler
every time the stopwatch dicks off a second, then writ-
ing the measurement and the time down on the pad
with your pencil.

This would give you a rough idea of how to recreate
the action of the waves at some future time, This is
essentially what an ADC does, except that it's done
while looking at 2 sound wave at the rate of 30,000
measurements, or “samples” per second.

The ADC records this. information in specific locations in
the memory in the form of binary code numbers, The
numbers and locations for one sample, which may be
up to four seconds long, are called the WAVESAMPLE,

Page 18/ Sampling

above process, This requires a Digital/Analog Converter
(DAC) that takes the digital information and re-assem
bles the waveshape as voltage information that can he
amplified and sent to the speakers.

Digital Recording as @ Musical Instrument

If we record a sound at-a sampling rate of $0,(M) sam-
ples per second and then play the sound back at 60,000
samples per second, the note would be one octave
higher than the original. By precisely adjusting this
playback rate with a keyboard controller, we can begin
to create music.

Like everything else, there are s few catches
to digital sampling.

There’s a limit to how miuch a sampled wave can be
raised and lowered in pitch before it begins to sound
like a squeak ora thud. Also, acoustic instruments have
different dynamic and harmonic qualities at different
pitch levels. :

‘The solution then is ‘to sample a sound at different
pitch intervals and not raise or lower the pitch too far
from the pitch of the original wavesample, The Mirage
van accommodate up to 8 separate wavesamples per
keyboard half, requiring a pitch shift of only about two
semitones in either direction. Because of this feature,
very accurate reproduction of acoustic instruments is
possible with the Mirage.

Catch number two is the sampling time. There are a
finite number of locations in the memory, and the
greater the number of wavesamples, the less memory Is

for each wavesample — sometimes less than’ half
second.

An effective solution to this situation is a process called
LOOPING. Looping is the replaying —again and again
without interruption —of a certain part of the wave:
sample. In practice it’s very much like creating a tape
loop. A part of the note is cut ont and the end is
spliced to the beginning, resulting in an unending and
uninterrupted sound.

The magic of the Mirage digital circuitry lets you choose
the loop and place it electronically. Now you can pre-
serve the attack and decay portions of a note and loop
the sustain portion, giving you a high quality note of
infinite duration. The playback cavelope parameters can
now tailor this looped sound so that it matches the
original sound,

When to call in reinforcements.

There's more to the details of Mirage Sampling and
programming than we'll address here. A yery extensive
Advanced Sampler’s Guide is available from your
authorized Ensoniq dealer that. will examine the capabil-
ities of the Mirage in great detail.

When you become familiar with the capabilities of the
Mirage, we're sure you'll want to move into the
advanced area. At that point, a personal computer will
be a-great help in showing you exactly what's going on
inside the Mirage and how you can best release its
musical power. And conversely, the Mirage will be a
great help in understanding and mastering your per-
sonal computer.

--- Page 19 ---

HOW TO SAMPLE

The Mirage sampling process is not much more complicated than making a
good quality audio tape copy. It involves making the proper connections, set-
ting the right levels and checking the results.

The process is controlled by the sampling parameters-and gives you'a Breat
deal of flexibility. To begin with, here is the recommended procedure to follow
when sampling. Additional information and variations to the procedure are con-
tained in the Advanced Sampler's Guide from your Authorized Ensoniq
Dealer.

GETTING READY TO SAMPLE

The nature of the sound you will be sampling will have some effect on the
results. Unfortunately there are no hard and fast rules governing different
techniques for different sounds. As you use the Mirage you will quickly adapt
to the procedure and develop your own methods for getting the best results.
AS af example, Jet's use an electric guitar. We can connect the guitar directly to
the input, use the ‘preamp out’ jack of an amplifier connected directly to the
input of the Mirage, or we can mike the:speaker cabinet and plug the micro-
phone into the Mirage. Let's use the latter case.

Do this... Here's what's happening. . . Display will show...

Select parameter 5 This is a switching parameter that will tell on (line input)

LINE LEVEL INPUT the Mirage what type of signal will be coming oF (mic input) 0 F
in. Line level inputs are from preamps, tape decks ‘and wnt

mixers. Mic level inputs are from microphones, unampli-
fied electric guitars and other low level sources.

Press SAMPLE UPPER You ure telling the Mirage which keyboard half >
or SAMPLE LOWER you wish the sample to apply to. This will also place
the Mirage in the level detect mode so that the = ~

strength of the incoming signal can be determined
before the sample is actually taken,

Press CANCEL/STOP This will exit the “level detect” mode.

Play the sound to be Adjust the level of your source or no signal threshold
sampled change the distance from the microphone until the

top light bar barely flickers.
Now you're ready to go. The next decision you'll have to make is the number

_ ae ge ”
of wavesamples there will be in your wavetable. Always use 0/PROG to

verify that you are working on the correct keyboard half, Getting Ready to SamplefPage 19

--- Page 20 ---

SINGLE WAVESAMPLE WAVETABLES

If you only need to take one wavesample in the lower or upper keyboard upper keyboard, You can use the RELATIVE COARSE TUNING parameter (67) or
wavetable, the sampling parameters are automatically set at the proper fevel. RELATIVE FINE TUNING parameter (68) to correct the sample to any pitch you
(Param 77-0ff). No matter where the pitch of the sample is. the Mirage will desire.
play that pitch back at key #17E on the lewer keyboard or key #46A on the
Do this... Here's what's happening. . . Display will show...
Select parameter 77 This will set the automatic parameter settings for a of
USER MULTI-SAMPLING single wavesample wavetable. oO
Press OFF i
Press SAMPLE LOWER You are instructing the Mirage to assign this sample to SL (sample lower ) cl
the lower part-of the keyboard. Jt
Press: ENTER/ START ‘The Mirage is now waiting for a signal to cross the Blank
sampling threshold before it begins to sample.
Play the-sample The Mirage is now sampling the sound. While its - SF (sampling
sampling you'll see the middle bar and when the sample finished) & F
is completed you'll see... ad
MULTIPLE WAVESAMPLE WAVETABLES
Oné wavetable can contain up to eight individual wavesamples. When more decimal system (base 16 to math buffs) of both numerals and alphabet

than one wavesample is used, you must select the location in the memory for characters is used. See the note at the bottom of the Memory Chart for an
cach wavesample. The-accompanying chart will suggest where to set the begin- —€xplanation of hexadecimal.

ning and ending parameter values for each wavesample. In order to be able to Once you decide how many wavesamples your wavetable will have, setting the
display all 256 segments in the memory on the two digit display, a hexa- parameters will follow the same procedure for cach wavesample-

EXAMPLE: Creating 2 2 wavesample wavetable on the lower keyboard half

Do this... Here’s what's happening... Display will show...

Select parameter 77 — This will defeat the automatic parameter-settings on

USER MULTI-SAMPLING for a single wavesample wavetable. on
Press ON LS é
Select parameter 27— Except in wcertain advanced cases, this parameter ol

INITIAL WAVESAMPLE should abways be set at |

Press A or N4 to set VALUE

Page 20/Single-and Muttipie Wavesampies

--- Page 21 ---

Do this... Here's what's happening... Display will show...
Select parameter 26— There are eight possible wavesamples to select o1 mis
WAVESAMPLE SELECT Select #1 u i
Press Avorw to set VALUE : |
Select parameter 6) — Since this is. a Wavesample #1, it's best to. begin at (K) nin
SAMPLE START the beginning of the memury. LL

- Press Avorxg to set VALUE —
Select parameter 6] — Since there will he two wavesamples in this wave- TF
SAMPLE END table. you ll want to give half the memory tw each, 7 FE
Press Avor Ww to set VALUE Looking on the Memory (hart across from “2 wave-

samples" you'll lind the value TF.

Select parameter 72— This will be the highest key assigned to this. wave 5

TOP KEY
Press A or w to set VALUE

sample, Each keyboard half has 30 keys, so select key
15 for wavesample #1

PresseSAMPLE LOWER

You are instructing the Mirage to assign this sample to

SL (sample lower)

the lower part of the keyboard. Flashing
Press ENTER /START The Mirage is now waiting for a signal to cross the Blank
Sampling Usreshold before it begins to sample.

You're now ready to begin to sample wavesample#1, If you've selected the
lower keyboard half and checked the input level, all youll have to do is play ERAS CNS
the sound to be sampled. Number of  Wavesample Value of ‘Value ol Top Key Lower Top Key Upper
Wavesample #2 will be entered in the memory in exactly the same way wave- Wavesamples Number Para. 60 = Para. 61 Para. 72 Para, 72
sample #1 was with the following changes ia parameter values 1 1 00 FE 30 ot
WAVESAMPLE SELECT (26) 02 3 1 ) ci 5 no
INITIAL WAVESAMPLE (27) No change 2 RO IF - 30 Gt
SAMPLE START (60) 80 1 1 00 SF 8 ®
SAMPLE END (61) IF 2 ip WF 5 wh
TOP KEY (72) 0 3 80 br P4,) St

4 CO VF 40 Gt
SAMPLING PARAMETERS 8 : 5 ur : ss

. 4 ‘ ;

In order to better understand the sampling process. we recommend that you 3 4 _ p =
familiarize yoursclf with the Sampling Parameters listed in the PARAMETER A 60) =| 5 6
APPENDIX beginning on page 26 of this manual, Understanding these param- 5 80) OF ig 50
eters is your best help in obtaining good samples 6 AO he 34 34
HEXADECIMAL NOTATION 7 se de cal a8
The digits () through 9 represent themselves. However the numbers 10 through 8 co ft 30 bs

15 are represented by letters in the following manner: A=10; b= 11; O=12; de 13;

Kets; Fe,

Multiple Wavesample Wavetables/ Page 27

--- Page 22 ---

The Mirage can be connected to other keyboards and equipment through a
system known as MIDL MIDI, or Musical Instrument Digital Interface is an
industry-wide set of computer communication standards that permits MIDI-
equipped instruments to “talk” to cach other. Some of the benefits of MIDI
include the ability to “remote contro!” more than one instrument from the
same keyboard and to syne multiple keyboard setups from a single sequencer.
In addition, non-MIDI sequencers and drum machines can he sync'd to the Mir-
age through the external syac jack. Before connecting several instruments to-
gether you should familiarize yourself with the MIDI codes in the APPENDIX
and with the following parameters.

Parameter No. Function
$l MIDI OMNI MODE ON/OFF
$2 MIDI CHANNEL SELECT
83 MIDI THRU MODE
Bi MIDI CONTROLLER ENABLE
&5 SEQUENCER EXTERNAL CLOCK.
86 EXTERNAL CLOCK
JACK SELECT

TYPICAL MIDI CONNECTIONS

This configuration will permit notes played on Mirage A to also
play on Mirage B. Conversely, notes played on Mirage B will also
play on Mirage A

MIDI IN MIDL OUT

81/MiDL OMNI MODE—ON 81/MIDI OMNI MODE—ON
62/Mi0l CHANNEL—1... 16 62/MIDI CHANNEL—1... 16

Page 22/ MIDI Connections

--- Page 23 ---

In the following configuration. the parameters are set differently,
but the result is the same. Since both instruments: are trans-
mitting and receiving MIDI data on channel 1, they will both
respond to cach other. So notes played on Mirage A will also play
on Mirage B and notes played on Mirage B will also play on
Mirage A.

Mio! OUT

81/MIDI OMNI MODE—OFF
82/MIDI CHANNEL —1

81 /MIDI OMNI MODE —OFF
82/MID! CHANNEL —1

If the channels weren't set the same, the two Mirages would
ignore each other,

In this configuration, Miraye’A will accept inputs only on channel
one, where Mirage B will accept information on all channels. So
notes played on Mirage A will also play on Mirage B, but notes
played on Mirage B will be ignored by Mirage A.

MIDI OUT Midi OUT

MIDI IN

- Mirage B

81/MIDI OMNI MODE—OFF 81/MIC! OMNI MODE—ON
82/MIDI CHANNEL —1 82/MIDI CHANNEL —any channe} other then 1

Mirage sequencers car also be syne'd together via MIDI. A
recorded sequence on Mirage A can-be sync’d to an altogether dif
ferent sequence recorded on Mirage 8. Note that in this configura
lion notes played on either Mirage will he ignored by the other
since the channels are different. MIDI clocks are transinitted on
all channels, so the sequencers will sync.

MIDE IN MIB} OUT

Miragee

81/MIDI OMNI MODE—OFF
82/MIDI CHANNEL —2
85/EXTERNAL CLOCK—ON
86/ JACK SELECT—OFF

81/MID| OMNI MODE—OFF
82/MIDI CHANNEL —1
85/EXTERNAL CLOCK —OFF

MIDI allows multiple keyboards to be syne’d to multi track
sequencers in such a way that different sequencer tracks drive dif-
ferent keyboards. In the following configuration, track | of the
sequencer will only play on Mirage A and track 2 of the sequencer
will only play on Mirage 8.

MIDI OUT

Transmits Track 1 data
on MIDI channel |, Track
2 data on MIDI channel 2
and so on.

miD} OUT

Mirage A

81/MID! OMNI MODE — OFF
82/MIDI CHANNEL —1
83/MIDI THRU—ON

81/MIDi OMNI MODE—OFF
82/ MIDI CHANNEL —2

MID) Connections! Page 23

--- Page 24 ---

Sabey~

\

Amplitude — xpressed as sound pressure or voltage,
itude is the measured amount Of a signal, Sounds
with greater amplitude are louder.
Atlack —‘he first part of a note. in the Mirage
envelope, it is a linear rate that starts-as the key is
depressed and ends at the PEAK level, and is adjustable
from instantaneous 1 very gradual.
Attack Velocity —The Mirage gives you the opuon of
controlling the steepness of the attack curve througli key
hourd velocity. Increased key velocity will increase the race
of the attack.
Bend —o gradually raise or lower the pitch by using
te PITCH BEND WHEEL
Boundary — ‘the sampling parameters divide the
Mirage memory into’256 SEGMENIS of 256 SAMPLES cach.
‘The beginning and ending poimts of each segment are
called the boundaries.
Chorusing —A sound. richening effect that simulates
the sounds af several voices when onc key is: played. ‘The
Mirage allows you to shift the pitch of one of the owo
oscillators assigned 19 each voice 40 achieve this effect
Clock —A timing control devier used to syne digitally
controlled units. Clock pulses are used to control the
Mirage sequemer,
Coarse Tune— A parameter used to make large and
rapid tuning changes,
Cutoff Frequency —We frequency point at which
a filter begins to attenuate an audio signal.
Dead Band — ‘he acca of wavel near the center of
rotation of the PITCH BEND WHEEL where there is no
effect on the sound so that it can be-more easily returned
to its mid position
Decay —\s the Mirage envelope, it a the exponential
rate that the amplitude of a sound (or cutoff frequency of
a filter} falls from the PEAK level to the SUSTAIN level

Page 24/ Glossary

Default—r value or condition that the Mirage auto-
matically sets itself to. When a diskette is inserted into the
disk drive, Sound #1 is automatically loaded to both key-
hoard halves with program #1 being current. ‘The Mirage
has many default values for programming, sampling and
sequencing. While these values are automatic, they can be
changed at any time you desire.

Detune— in normal playing, the Mirage uses two ascil
lators per key. By using the detume parameter (33)_.one
of the oscillators can he tuned slightly off pitch from the
other. Slight pitch changes will result in a CHORUSING
sound.

1— in audio, the digital system uses information
in the form of binary numbers rather than waveforms and
voltages when recording. processing and playing hack
sound. ‘the digital playback is processed through a digital-
to-analog converter where it is changed into voltage values
that can then be treated like any ather analog signal,
Digital Oscillator —A waveform generator where
the output is a séries of numbers rather than 2 voltage.
Digital oscillators. can generate complex waveforms with
much more uccuracy than analog oscillators
Digital —A system of sound recording
where an analog sound is converted into digital informa-
tion and stored in computer memory or on 2 disk In the
Mirage, sampled: sounds are given pitch control via the
keyboard permitting any recorded sound to he played back
as music.

Digital Sequencer —. sequencer that records and
oe. notes based on iatormoiie about key strikes,
key velocity, and pitch and mod wheel positions rather
thary recording sound output,

Envelope —A term used to describe the amplitude
contour Or filter cutoff frequency contour as a function of
time. Acoustic sounds have natural cnvclopes as vibrations
attenuate over time. Electronic instruments have envelope
yeneritors 10 create this effect,

fe—The symbol. for cutoff frequency, af that frequency
at which the sound begins to be attenuated

Fine Tune —A contro used to make small adjust-
ments in pitch. Vhe Mirage fine tune parameter permits
pitch changes as small as '/» semitone.

Formatied Diskette —\ Mirage diskette that oon-
tains’a framework for sound informatin, but no actual
information. Used to store Sampled sounds, programs and

Hexadecimal—a form of mathematical notation
called “base: 16”. As used in the Mirage display. it permits
the display of all 256 “pages” of waveiable storage using
tinly two digits in the display. Numbers 0 through 9 are.
represented by themselves while numbers 10 through 15
are represented by the letters “A” through “F”

Input —A signal entering an instrament. Also the point
at which it enters,

Interface —Vierally, the place where any wwo things
come together. Io musicianspeak it is commonly under-
stood to be the linking of two pieces of electronic equip
ment together

Keyboard —s controller used to give pitch and
dynamic control of a musical instrument to the player.
Keyboard Tracking —ssigoing 2 different value
@ parameter based on which key of the keyboard is
depressed. For cxample, the cutoff frequency of a filter
can move. up as higher keys are played.

LFO— tow frequency oscillator. These oscillators usually
operate in the sub-audio range and control the frequency
of effects such as vibrato.

Line Level —An audio signal whose strength is at
least 800mV. Also an audio input that requires a level of
atleast 80UmY in operate at a specified. signal-to-noise
ati.

Load—\n the Mirage, 1 term used to describe the
transfer of information from diskette to the internal
Loop —A term used to describe the connecting of the
end of a signal or sequence Lo the beginning point or
some intermediate point along its duration. As it applies
to # sequencer, it means that the sequence: will start over
immediately after it finishes. As it applies to sampling, it
means creating a continuous sound by connecting two
points in the wavesample.

Lowpass Filter —A filter thay auenuates the {re
quencies above the cutoff frequency.

Memory — The sum total of locations where informa
tion can) be stored. The Mitage has-GiK (65,536 locations)
of memory for each keyboard half ‘The sampling param
eters divide the memory into 256 SEGMENTS of 256
SAMPLES each. The beginning and ending points of cach
segment ary cilled the BOUNDARIES.

Mic Level—Audiv signals with a strength below 50my.

--- Page 25 ---

MIDI— Musical instrument |igital Interface. An indus-
try-wide set of computer communications standards that
enables instruments and other equipment to “talk” 10
each other and issue and-obey commands:

Mix Mode—n the Mirage, a parameter that assigns
two consecutive wayesamples to cach key on the keyboard.
‘The balance between the two sounds can be controlled by
a balance parameter, the velocity sensitivity of the key-
hoard or tw modulation wheel.

Modulation — the process of introducing a periodic
alteration to a sound ‘source such as vibrato, so 4s to
change the character of the audio. signal,

Mono, Mode —in the Mirage it is a control
mode that assigns one voice to each half of the keybourd
Ifa second key is depressed while the first key is still
down the voior iy “stolen” from the first key, but the
envelope is not re-triggered. Liseful for duplicating the
sound of monophonic instruments such as-xaxophone
Omni Mode —s ivi operational mode where an
instrument responds to information recived over any of
MIDI's 16 charinels.

Oscillator —A deview thar creates a repeating electrical
wave. Mirage uscillators are digital ascillajors that use a
wavetable based on actual acoustic sounds rather than
basic waves,

Parameter —Any changeable setting, switch or com-
mand of the Mirage is called 4 parameter. The Mirage uses
a multi-function control panel through which parameters.
can be selected and controlled. 'Taning, filter frequency
cutoff, sample time, velocity sensitivity and LEO frequency
are all examples of parameters,

Pitch Bend —To change the pitch in a continvous
manner using the pitch bend wheel.

Poly Mode— A0i operating mode where an
instrument responds to information received only on a:
specific MIDI channel.

— Capable of producing-more than one
itch or voice simultancously. The Mirage can play up to
eight different voices at the same time.

mm —A set-of playback paranieter values applied
to a particular wavetable that results in a particular sound.
‘The Mirage has four available programs for cach sound

—Filter resonance. It is possible to adjust the lowpass
iter in the Mirage to introduce a narrow resonant peak
just hefore rolloff occurs, The resultant sound shows +2

noticeable emphasis of a narrow frequency band

Release —The final portion of an envelope that begins
when the key iy lifted. It is an exponential rate that drops
the amplitude or filter fe from the sustain level wo zero-in
the casi: of amplitude or to the original fc setting in the
case of the filter

Release Velocity —The speed with which the key is
lifted. Release velocity can be used to control the release
rate, with high velocities shortening the release and low
velocities extending Ue release

Resonance —Sev Q

Rolloff Slope—The starpacss of the cutoff fre
guency expressed in dB per octave. The higher the ratio
(dh) number, the sharper the attenuation, The Mitage fil
ters have 2 rolioff slope of 24dB per octave.

Sample —n the Mirage memory, each location is
seférred to usw sample. 256 samples make up one
SEGMENT

Sampling Rate — Toe wamlxr of times per second
that a deed record is made of an audio wave form The
Mirage samples at 30,000 samples per second.
Save — the process of transferring information from’ the
internal memory of the Mirage to a Formatted Diskette for
Permanent storage The opposite of loading.
Segment — the Mirage memory has 64K memory loca-
tions divided into 256 segments of 256 SAMPLES each. Thi:
beginning and ending points of each segment are called
the BOUNDARIES

Sequence —A set of keystroke commands stored itt a
sequencer.

Sequencer —the Mirage uses 2433-note digital
sequencer, See Digital Sequencer.

Sequence Loop—a function of a sequencer where
the- recorded sequence is played over and over until
instructed Lo stop.

Sound —in the Mirage, a sound is. defined as a WAVE-
TABLE (comprised of up 8 WAVESAMPLES} plus a PRO-
GRAM (the collection of all the program parameter values )

Sound Diskettes —Ensonig makes avaiable pre-
programmed sampled sounds on mini-diskettes. Each of
these Sound Diskettes contains three distinct sampled
sounds, with cach sound having four programs.

Split Ke —The Mirage features what is called
a split key . The keyboard is divided into two sections
(usually, 31 keys fower, 30 keys upper). Different sounds
‘of different programs of the same sound can be loaded
into each keyboard half.

generate simple waveforms (5

Sustain —The: ampliude or fier level held from the

end of the decay slope to key release.

Fe Pan (wo or more units together so that
lock pulses permit them to play together in a Synchron-

ized fashion. The most common sync connections involve

sequencers and drum machines connected to keyboards.

Touch Sensitive — (See Velocity Sensitive)

Value — Rather than have knobs, sliders and switches,
the Miragéuses @ system of parameters and values to
change and modify sounds. Expressed in numbers. (cither
decimal or hexadecimal), values represent: amplitudes. fre
quencies, balances and other conditions. depending an the
parameter selected,

Velocity Sensitivity —\ system of sensors thas ean
determine how hard-and fast.a key is played. This infor-
mation can be applied to control amplitude, filter
frequency, envelope functions and oscillator balance.
Voice —A comple: sound controlled by a single key.
The Mirage features eight distinct voices with two oscilla-
tors for each voice.

Volatile Memory — Ao internal memory that wall
HOL Telain any information if the power to the unit is
turned off. The Mirage has a volatile memory, so we
recommend that you save sounds and programs you create
to diskette as shon as your sampling or programming
session is completed

Waveform —he shape of a sound wave shown as a
function of amplitude and time: Synthesizer oscillators

" p, Unangke, etc.) and com-
bine them to create sound Digital sampling keyboards
such as Uh: Mirage generate complex waveforms hased on
actual sounds that-have been recorded (sampled) into
TeCTOTY

Wavesample—A wavelorm that has been sampled
inty the Mirige memory Once in memory, the keyboard
controls the pitch of Uw wavesample, The Mirage can ac-
commodate up to eight separate wavesamples per key-
board hall Singe acoustic instruments change dynamic and
harmonic character with pitch, the Mirage is capable of
very accurate reproduction,

Wavesample Interval—the number of keys on
the keyboard assigned Lo cach wavesumple,

. Wavetable— the sum of all the wavesamptes ‘on a

keyboard half,

Glossary! Page 25

--- Page 26 ---

Yams
ee

PROGRAM PARAMETERS (01, 02, 03. 04)
These parameters are used to select one of the four programs
assigned to each sound on-each keyboard half, You must first
press the 0/PROG button which will display the current progeam
number and the keyboard half it is assigned to. Pressing, the
0/PROG button again will display the program number on the
other keyboard half When sounds are loaded, Program | is
automatically assigned,

11/SAVE LOWER KEYBOARD SOUND (SL)
12/SAVE UPPER KEYBOARD SOUND {SU}
13/SAVE BOTH KEYBOARD SOUNDS {SA}

Command parameters that will tell the Mirage that you Wish to
save the current keyboard sounds on diskette, The saving process
will tequire you to press 1,2, or 3 on the SELECT keypad to
indicate the location on the diskette that you wish the sound
transferred tx. Pressing ENTER/ START will initiate the saving
process, Pressing CANCEL/STOP will abort the procedure and
return the Mirage to its previous. status, with the SAVE command
parameter selected

14/SAVE CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS {SP)
This command parameter will permit you to save your own con
figuration parameters in place of the default values. The values
saved on diskette will be those of parameter #'s 21 through 25,
73 through 77, 81 through 89 and 91 and 92. In order to reload
these parameters into the Mirage memory will require you to turn
the Mirage off for.a few seconds, thea turn it back on and load
the diskette on which the configuration parameters have been
saved.

15/COPY PROGRAM TO LOWER (CL)
16/COPY PROGRAM TO UPPER (Cu)
‘These ate command parameters that will tell the Mirage thar you
wish to copy current program parameter values into another
program location. This will allow you to duplicate a program
parameter configuration you ve personally created into another
program location on either the upper or lower keyboard half. It
will also permit you t apply current parameter values to another
sound.

Page 26/ Parameter Appendix

21/MASTER TUNE (00-99)
‘The MASTER TUNE will autonsatically set itself to 4940. (VALUE
50). It is adjustable over a five semitone range in increments of
1/20 semitone,

22/PITCH BEND RANGE (00-34)
‘The PITCH BEND RANGE will automatically set itself (default) to
4 minor 3rd (VALUE 8), It is adjustable over-a wide range

in increments of 1/20 semitone,

23/KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSITIVITY (00-63)
The KEYBOARD VELOCITY SENSITIVITY will automatically set itself
(default) to the touch of the average player (VALUE 30). Players
with a heavier than average touch should use the lower values
and players with a light touch should use the higher values.

24/KEYBOARD BALANCE (00-63)
The KEYBOARD BALANCE will autommatically set equal levels for
the upper and lower halves of the keyboard (VALUE 50). The
parameter works very much like 4 pan pot with the higher
numbers favoring the upper keyboard and lower numbers favoring
the lower keyboard

25/UPPER/LOWER PROGRAM LINK

A switching parameter that will allow you Lo-connect the 0/PROG
button to both keyboard halves simultancously. With the parameter
ON, a program change made on one keyboard half will also take
place on the other keyboard half When OFF, you will be able to
choose different programs for the upper and lower halves.
28/MIX MODE (ON-OFF)
Each Mirage key is assigned two oscillators, When this Switching
parameter is OFF. the nwo oscillittors will use the same wave-
sample, When this switch is ON, the oscillators. will use consecu-
tive wavesamples—one to each oscillator. For the MIX MODE to
work effectively, odd numbered wavesamples (1, 3. 5, 7) should
be from a different sound svurce than the even numbered wave-
samples. The balance between the two oscillatory can be con-
trolled by parameters 34 and 35.

A typical use of the MIX MODE is to have a sult sound on the
odd wavesamples and 4 loud sound on the even wavesamples,
‘This is particularly effective with piano sounds. By using key
velocity to-control the balance, (VALUE 1, PARAM $5), a realistic
soft piano sound will he heard when keys are depressed slowly
and a true loud piano sound will be heard when keys are
‘depressed firmly,

--- Page 27 ---

29/MONOPHONIC MODE {ON-OFF}
A switching parameter to choose between polyphonic keybourd
and monophonic keyboard functions. With the switch OFF. the
Mirage will play in its asual eight-voice polyphonic splendor. With
the switch ON, one voice will be. assigned to each kevboard half,

If a key is played while another is still down, the voice will be
“stolen” from the first key, hut the cavelope will not be
re-trigyered.

3I/LFO SPEED : (00-99)
‘The LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR SPEED. parameter will change
the frequency of the LEO, It is adjustable from 5Hz (VALUE 0) 10
40Hz (VALUE 99), The LPO affects pitch only.

32/LFO DEPTH ; (00-99)
The LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR DEPTH parameter controls the

amplitude of the LFO or ¢an assign, the control to the MODULA-
TION WHEEL (VALUE 0)

33/0.0. DETUNE (00-99)
The DIGITAL OSCILLAFOR DETUNE parameter controls the fre
quency difference: between two. oscillators used on the same key
(see param. 28). It will cause the second oscillator to play sharp
in THz increments. The VALUE. display will show the exact pitch
offset in Hertz,

34/0.0. BALANCE (00-63)
‘The DIGITAL OSCILLATOR BALANCE controls the relative volume
level of the two oscillators in the MIX MODE or for chorusing
(param, 28). This parameter automatically sets itself to equal bal
ance (VALLE 31 and can be adjusted to any proportional balance

35/D.0. BALANCE VS (00-31)
‘The VELOCITY SENSITIVE BALANCE parameter makes the digital
oscillator balance dependent on -key velocity. A soft touch on the
keyboard will favor oscillator 1, a medium touch will balance the
oscillators equally and a hard touch will favor oscillator 2. The
D.O, BALANCE (param, 34) will set the initial balance for a soft
touch: Parameter 35 controls how much the balance changes with
velocity, with one exception. When the value is ‘0’ the balance is
controlled by the MODULATION WHEEL instead. Since each oscilla-
tor can play 4 different wavesample, it is possible to mix between
two totally different sounds,

36/FILTER Fe (00-99)
The FILTER CUTOFF FREQUENCY parameter adjusts the initial

“cutoff frequency of the low pass filter. The filter is adjustable

from 50Hz (VALUE 0) t0 ISKIZ (VALUE 99) and: featnres a
24db/octave: rolloff slope:

37/FILTER Q (00-40)
The FILTER RESONANCE (()) controls the amplitude: of the
resonant peak of the filter It is adjustable from no peak (VALUE
0) to just below oscillation (VALUE 40)

38/FILTER TRACKING (00-04)
The FILUER KEYBOARD TRACKING parameter allows the note
played on the keyboard to determine the frequency cutoff of the
filter— lower notes will have a lower cutoff, higher notes a
higher cutoff, It is adjustable from no tracking (VALUE 0) w one
octave in filter cutoff per octave on kevhoard (VALUE 4),

ENVELOPE PARAMETERS
The Mirage offers you.a wide range of control over’ the amplitude
and filter envelopes of a sound. In addition to being able w
create fixed envelopes, you can use the keyhoard velocity sensitiv-
ity feature to control any or all of the parameters of an envelope.
Note that many of the envelope parameters interact. The velocity
sensitive parameters are particularly dependent on the fixed
envelope parameters.

Filter Envelope Parameters

“40/FILTER ATTACK 00-31)

‘The FILTER ATTACK parameter contfols the rate at which the filter
frequency will increase from the initial FREQUENCY CUTOFF
(param. 36). It is-adjustable from instantaneous (VALLE 0) to 48
seconds (VALUE 31),

41/FILTER PEAK (00-31)
Controls the maximum cutoff frequeney the filter will reach at the
top of the attack Slope. It is adjustable from zero (VALUE 0) to 4
maximum) of I5KHy-(VALUE 31). Note that the peak has no effect
on the rate of the attack.

42/FILTER DECAY {00-31}
Controls the rate at which the filter cutoff frequency will descend
from the PEAK value to the SUSTAIN value. At VALUE 31, it will
take 30 seconds to reach the sustain level At VALUE 0 it will drop
instantly to the SUSTAIN level,

Parameter Appendix! Page 27

--- Page 28 ---

43/FILTER SUSTAIN (00-31)
Controls the cutoff frequency that the filter will hold as long as
the key is depressed. At VALUE 0 it will be the same as the initial
cutoff frequency (param. $6). At VALLE 31 it will be maximum.

44/FILTER RELEASE (00-31)
Gontrols the rate at which the filter frequency will descend from
the sustain value to the initial cutoff frequency (param. 56). At
VALUE. $1 it will take 30 seconds to reach the minimum level and
at VALUE 0 it will release instantly,

45/FILTER ATTACK vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSETIVE FILTER AVTACK parameter makes the
filter attack rate dependent on key velocily. At VALUE 0), key veloc-
ity will not effect the attack rate. Increasing the value will make
the attack rate more sensitive to keyboard velocity (increased key
velocity will increase the attack rate)

46/FILTER PEAK vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE FILTER PEAK parameter makes the max
imum filter frequency peak level dependent on the key velocity. At
VALUE 0. key velocity will not effect the peak. Increasing the value
will make the peak level more sensitive to key velocity (increased
key velocity will raise the peak frequency).

47/FILTER DECAY— KEYBOARD SCALED (00-31)
A parameter that makes the decay cate of the filter cavelope
dependent on key number. This permits the filler to have a
longer decay rate on lower notes than on higher notes. At VALUE
0, it will have no effect on the decay setting. Increasing the value
number will both lengthen the decay rate of lower notes and
shorten the decay rate of higher notes.

48/FILTER SUSTAIN vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE FILTER SUSTAIN parameter makes the
sustain level dependent on key velocity, At VALUE 0), key velocity
will have no effect on filter frequency sustain. Increasing the
value will make the frequency sustain more sensitive to key
velocity (increased key velocity will raise the sustain frequency)

49/FILTER RELEASE vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE FILTER RELEASE parameter ‘makes the
release rate of the filter frequency dependent on key-up velocity.
Increasing the value will make the release rate more sensitive

to key-up velocity (increased key-up velocity will shorten the
release rate).

Page 28) Parameter Appendix

Amplitude Envelope Parameters

50/ATTACK RATE (00-31)
Controls the rate at whieh the volume will rise to the peak when
a key is played. At VALUE 0 it is instant and-at VALUE 31 the
amplitude will take 30 seconds. fo reach the peak.

51/PEAK LEVEL (00-31)
Controls the maximum ‘amplitude that will be reached at the top
of the attack slope. It is-adjustable from no sound at VALUE 0 to
maximum output at VALUE 31,

52/DECAY RATE (00-31)
Controls the rate at which the amplitude descends from the peak
level to the sustain level, At VALUE 31 it will take 30 seconds for
the amplitude to fall to the sustain level. At VALUE 0 it will drop
instantly to the SUSTAIN level,

53/SUSTAIN LEVEL (00-31)
Seis the amplitude level between the decay slope and key release.
At VALUE 0 there will be no output after the decay and at VALUE
31 the sustain will be at the maximum level.

54/RELEASE RATE (80-31)
Controls the rate at which the’amplitude descends to () after the
key is released. At VALUE 31 it will take 30 seconds to reach 0
and at VALUE @ the amplitude will fall instantly to 0

55/ATTACK vs (00-31)
Makes the ATTACK RATE dependent on key velocity. At VALUE 0
key velocity will not effect the attack rate. Inercasing the value
will make the attack rate more sensitive to keyboard velocity
(increased key velocity will increase the attack rate ).

56/PEAK LEVEL vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE PEAK LEVEL parameter makes the
avaximum peak level dependent on key velocity: At VALUE 0. key
velocity will not effect the peak level. Increasing the value will
make the peak level more sensitive Lo key velocity (inercased
velocity will raise the peak level. )

57/DECAY—KEYBOARD SCALED (00-31)
A parameter that will alter the decay rate inversely to key
number. This parameter permits the cavelope to have a long
decay on lower notes and shorter decay on higher notes, At
VALLE 0) it will have no effect ow the decay setting, Increasing the
value will both lengthen the decay rate of low notes and shorten
the decay rate of higher notes.

--- Page 29 ---

58/SUSTAIN LEVEL vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE SUSTAIN LEVEL parameter makes the
sustain level dependent on key velocity. At VALUE 0, key velocity
will have no effect on sustain level. Increasing the value will make
the sustain level more sensitive to key velocity (increased velocity
will raise the sustain level).

59/RELEASE RATE vs (00-31)
The VELOCITY SENSITIVE RELEASE RATE parameter makes the
release rate dependent on key velocity, At VALEE 0 key. velocity
will have no effect on release rate. Increasing the value will make
the release rate more sensitive to key-up velocity (increased
key-up velocity will shorten the release rate

SAMPLING PARAMETERS
The sampling parameters (60 through 77) will control the entry
and manipulation of the wavesample selected by parameter 26,
Since Mirage sampling is a computer driven function, very specific
directions must be given to the Mirage to obtain the best samples
Yet sampling is an art as much us it is a science, At Ensoniq.
many hours of effort and many dollars worth of sophisticated
equipment are used to-create sounds provided on Ensoniq Sound
Diskettes. Don't be disappointed if your initial samples aren't
quite up to snuff. The Advanced Sampler’s Guide, available from
your authorized Ensoniq dealer, combined with vour increasing
experience, will help you get better sounds.
26/WAVESAMPLE SELECT (1-8)
A sampling parameter that will select one of cight possible wave
samples for each keyboard half. Once selected, this wavesample
will be controlled by parameters 60 through 75 until the next
wavesample is se ;
27/INITIAL WAVESAMPLE (1-8)
This parameter will select the wayesample number used by the
lowest key of a keyboard half Except in certain advanced sam-
pling situations, this parameter should remain set to “1”.
60/WAVESAMPLE START (00-FF)
Samipling parameter to select the starting segment in the Mirage
memory for the currcal wavesample. If the wavesample iy #1, the
start yalue-will usually be 00. Subsequent wavesamples (2, 3,
etc.) will usually start one segment (one digit) after the end of
the previous wavesample The WAVESAMPLE START values are in
hexadecimal (00-FF)

61/WAVESAMPLE END (00-FF)
Sampling parameter to select the ending segment in the Mirage
memory for the current wavesample. The value will be determined
by the number of wavesamples in the wavetable. The value table
in the sampling section will give you suggested ending and start
ing values:

LOOPING
Rather than assign valuable memory space to a portion of a
wavesample that simply repeats, the Mirage uses a technique
called “looping” to extend the decay and sustain portions of 4
sound.
Most acoustic sounds stablize in character rather quickly. In less
than 4 second, an acoustic guitar note has settled down to some-
thing resembling a sine wave. By looping the Jast portion of a \s
second acoustic guitar sample, a very true guitar sound with long
sustain Can be created while using a minimum amount of memory
62/LO0P START (00-FF)
A sampling parameter to select the segment at which the looping
process will begin. To create an effective loop; the LOOP START
should be a point sometime after the initial attack portion of the
wavesample has been completed. Like other starting and ending
parameters, LOOP START is memory segment number expressed
in hexadecimal.
63/LO0P END (00-FF)
A sampling parameter to select the segment where a loop will end
and recycle to connect with the LOOP START: The LOOP END may
or may not coincide with the WAVESAMPLE END. LOOP END ix a
memory segment expressed in hexadecimal.

64/LOOP END FINE ADJUST (00-FF)
This parameter will allow you to adjust the LOOP END in individ-
ual samples within the chosen loop end segment, This fine
adjustment will help you match the loop end to the loop start as
smoothly as possible: (See MEMORY in GLOSSARY).

65/LOOP SWITCH (ON-OFF)
Turns the looping function on and off. When OFF, the wavesampic
will play back from beginning to end and then stop, When ON,

the wavesample will play back from beginning to LOOP END and
then continue immediately from LOOP START, looping as long as
the key is depressed. Note that amplitude envelope parameters
will control the decay, sustain and release functions of the note.

Parameter Appendix! Page 29

--- Page 30 ---

66/WAVESAMPLE ROTATE (00-FF)
This parameter will “move” or “rotate” the current wavesampic
within the Mirage memory one sample at a time. It is used to
eliminate “dead space” at the beginning of a wavesample or to
align an appropriate LOOP START point with « segment boundary.
Pressing the AV value button will move the wave one sam-
ple to the right in memory. Pressing the Ww button will move the
wavesample one sample to the left. This parameter is called
ROTATE because rather than becoming “lost”, values at the wave-
sample boundary will shift to the opposite end of the wavesample
as they are moved.

67/RELATIVE TUNING —COARSE (00-07)
Alters the pitch of the current wavesample in octave increments.
68/RELATIVE TUNING —FINE (00-FF)

Alters the pitch of the current wavesample in 1/20 semitone
increments. There are 256 increments expressed in hexadecimal,

69/RELATIVE AMPLITUDE (00-63)

Adjusts the amplitude of the current wavesample only. This allows
you to match the volume levels of several different wavesamples.

70/RELATIVE FILTER FREQUENCY (00-99)
Adjusts the cutoff frequency of the filter for the current wave-
sample, relative to the other wavesamples in the wavetable.

71/MAXIMUM FILTER FREQUENCY (00-99)
Sets the upper limit of the cutoff frequency for the current wave-
sample, regardless of any other filter value (program, envelope,

velocity }

72/TOP KEY (01-61)
Selects the highest key that will use the current wavesample. The
TOP KEY values will determine how many keys will use the wave-
sample. The highest TOP KEY of the lower keyboard will deter-
mine the split point.

73/SAMPLE TIME ADJUST (30-99)
Sets the time between individual samples for the current wave-
sample. Combined with the SAMPLE START and SAMPLE END
parameters, it will determine the duration of the current wave-
sample. The value is expressed in microseconds with VALUE 34
corresponding to the maximum sample rate of 29kHz and VALUE
99 corresponding to the minimum sample rate of 1OKHz,

Page 30/ Parameter Appendix

74/INPUT FILTER FREQUENCY (00-99)
Filter cutoff frequency adjustment that will determine the maxi
mum frequency that the Mirage will samiple for the current wave-
sample, It is adjustable from 50Hz at VALUE 0 to 15kIIz at VALUE
99.

75/LINE LEVEL INPUT {ON-OFF}
Switching parameter to match the Mirage input to the sound
source to be sampled in the current wavesample. At VALUE OFF
the input will accept mic level signals. At VALLE ON the input will
accept line level inputs.

76/SAMPLING THRESHOLD (00-63)
Adjusts the threshold level for the current wavesample. Pressing
the SAMPLE UPPER or SAMPLE LOWER switch will put the Mirage
in the “level detect” mode. Playing the sound to be sampled
should light the middle bar in the display. If the middle bar does
not light, pressing CANCEL/STOP and then lowering the value
number of this parameter will lower the sampling threshold. After
ENTER/START has been pressed. the first signal above this
threshold will automatically begin the sampling process.

77/USER MULTISAMPLING (ON-OFF)
Switching parameter to choose between user-selected sampling
parameters and Mirage default values, If this parameter is set to
OFF, when sampling is selected, the Mirage will automatically set
up all the parameters necessary to create a wavetable made up of
a single wavesample. When more than one wavesample will make
up a wavetuble, you will have t set your own set of parameters,
after setting this switch to ON,

MIDI PARAMETERS
81/MIDI OMNI MODE/ON-OFF (ON-OFF)
Switch parameter to choose between MIDI Omni and Poly modes
of operation. When the switch is ON, the Mirage will operate in
the MIDI Omni Mode, When the switch is OFF, the Mirage will
operate in the MIDI Poly Mode. In the Omni Mode, the Mirage
will receive MIDI data on all 16 MIDI channels. In the Poly Mode.
the Mirage will transmit and receive MIDI data on only the chan-
nel selected by parameter 82.
82/MIDI CHANNEL SELECT (01-16)
In the MIDI Poly Mode, you must select one of 1 MIDI channels
on which to receive MIDI data. When a channel is selected, the

Mirage will accept and transmit data on only that channel. Any
MIDI data received on any other channel will be ignored.

--- Page 31 ---

83/MIDI THRU MODE (ON-OFF)

Switching ‘parameter to determine whether or not the Mirage will

“pass along” MIDI data it receives. When ON, the Mirage will echo

all MIDI data it receives regardless of channel. When OFF, the

Mirage will not echo any data it receives, except clocks, but will

send data it creates.

84/MIDI CONTROLLER ENABLE ON-OFF)

Selects whether or not the Mirage will send and receive PITCH

BEND and MODULATION WHEEL data via MIDI

ON—Pitch and Mod Wheel data sent and received.

OFF—Pitch and Mod Wheel data not sent or received.
SEQUENCER PARAMETERS

85/EXTERNAL SEQUENCER CLOCK (ON-OFF)

To connect the Mirage sequencer with the clock of an external

unit such as a drum machine or other sequencer

On— External Clock Off—Internal Clock

86/EXTERNAL CLOCK JACK SELECT (ON-OFF)
Selects which input jack will be used to connect to the external
clock.

ON—Syne Jack OFF— MIDI In: fuck

NOTE: The sequencer will always put outa MIDI clock to the

MIDE OUT jack regardless. of clock input.

87/INTERNAL CLOCK RATE (00-99)
Changing the internal clock rate will speed up or slow down the
playback of a recorded sequence without changing the pitch of the
notes, The real time recording speed is always “25” on the
parameter value. Increasing the value number will increase the
speed up to 4 times.

88/SEQUENCER LOOP SWITCH (ON-OFF)
‘Yells the Sequencer whether to play a recorded sequence once or
to keep repeating it indefinitely

ON—Sequence will keep playing until STOP is pressed.
OFF—Sequence will play through once then stop automatically.

89/SUSTAIN PEDAL/FOOTSWITCH SELECT (ON-OFF)
Changes the function of the footswitch between sustain pedal and
remote sequencer switch.

ON—In the record function, the footswitch operates the same as
the sequencer PLAY switch. In the play function it operates 4s 4
remote START/STOP switch. In neither case does it disable the
PLAY button.

OFF — As-a sustain pedal the switch holds the sustain value of the
notes played —same as keeping keys depressed,

98/DISK ERROR CODE (01-08)
This parameter will display information about problems that may
he occuring in the disk system, The value of this parameter cor: ~
responds to error messages or codes which will often appear
automaticly when you ask the Mirage to do something that is
not possible or reflects a problem with the disk drive or diskettes
themselves.

Disk Error Codes

0} di—Disk Drive Erro¢—This usually indicates.a serious
mechanical problem

02-05 nF—Not Found —The information you have requested ts
not inthe requested location on the diskette.

66 ud—Unformatted Disk—tnlormation cannot be saved on
the current diskette because it is not formatted for the
Mirage,

07 ad—No Diskette —The Mirage can’t save or load because
there is no diskette in the drive.

08 Pd—Protected Disk—Information cannot he saved on the
current diskette hecause the write-protect tab is set

99/DISK CONTROLLER STATUS CODE

‘This parameter is used by service personnel to diapnose disk drive
rélated problems: should they occur,

Q1/EXTERNAL COMPUTER PORT ENABLE {ON-OFF}
With certain special equipment and instructions, you will be able
té connect a personal computer to the Mirage. This switching
parameter will permit information to pass in and out of the
Mirage EXTERNAL COMPUTER PORT.

92/SERIAL PORT BAUD RATE SWITCH (ON-OFF)
Switching parameter to change the baud rate of the SERIAL
(MIDE) POR. When the switch is ON the baud rate will be RS
232 compatible (4800). When the switch is OFF the baud rate will
be MIDI compatible (31.25k Baud)

97/SOFTWARE VERSION NUMBER (00-99)
The “value” of this parameter is the version number of the soft-
ware currcatly loaded into the Mirage. Ensoniq Sound Diskettes
will be updated from time to time and the version number will be
your way of determining the exact software you have.

Parameter Appendix! Page 31

--- Page 32 ---

/
’ “This eque-irenl geneutes and uses radio feaqancy enesgy and If not insisilec and used property; that is, in strat

Cations ti Suspart fof Pant 150! FOC utes,

farincé in  residentie! imeitanon. Hownver, there is no gueraniee that inpvtererias will hot occur in & parieular
instaiation, thes equipment does quis misrterance tp radio a tnlvvEion reception Which o2n be cefermined by
huning he equipment off snd on, ifte ser & encouraged 10 try to correct tne Charforence bi crear mone ot Me j
foeowirgy mageures.

~fetocate the metrumant with respect in she reveiMer
- nove the mstument away foe! the receiver

«ple He Instrument into & diffeednt oulet So that the instrumarrt and receiver are on diferent branch circturts,

Hinecossary, the user should! consult the desir or an experienced radio television technician or sdiiitonal supe:

sfons_ The user may find the tollowing booket prapered by tha Faders! Communications Commission hattul:

“How 20 igo ty and Resolve Radto- 1 intertersrice Protieirs ~ This bookielis avaiable trom the &.S. Gosemmant /
Printing Ollie, Washington, DC 20402. Stock No. 004-000-00345-4"

Jn onder 40 fulfill waranty requirements. the Mbrags Digital Samplitg. Keyboard shmwid be sarvicad onty by et
Authorized Ensong Repair Staton,

ENSONIO* Corp - 263. Great Valley Parkway - Malvern, PA 19355
ENSONIO * Europe PVBA - Ave Stalingrad, 65+ 1000 Sruxeiles - Belgique
Sakata Shokai - Minam! Morimachi - Chu-O Building - 6-2: Higashi-Tenma, 2-Chome + Kita-ku, Osaka. 530, Japan

Gonosp! and Gapy... Associates & 1684 ENSONIO Corp. All dahts reserved.
Design andillusteton Pat Giligan Designs, Inc Mey oie reeset oie %

MM1-~1.2-985-100M PartNo. 9310000207
