# OCR (Tesseract, 200 dpi) — source: mirage_advanced_samplers_guide.pdf

--- Page 1 ---

Mirage

DIGITAL SAMPLING KEYBOARD

FEATURES ~-

* Step-by-step sampling tutorials.

* Sampling theary and techniques for
multisampling and loaping.

* Fade-n, fade-out, merging waveforms,
sound reversal.

CONTAINS -

* Mirage Advanced Sampler's Manual.

» Mirage MIDI specs and system—
exclusive codes,

* 2 Mirage Advanced Sampler’s Operating
System [MASOS) Diskettes,

Model No. ASG-1
Part No. 3920000301

--- Page 2 ---

Credits:

Written and Designed by: J. William Mauchly

Additional Material: Alex Limberis, Thomas Metcalf,

John O. Senior and Bob Yannes
Editing: Robin Weber and Bob Yannes
Illustrations: Bob Yannes

Copyright © 1985
Ensoniq™ Corp.

263 Great Valley Parkway
Malvern, PA 19355

All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America

This Guide is copyrighted and all rights are reserved by Ensoniq Corp. This document may not, in whole or
in part, be copied, photocopied, reproduced, translated or reduced to any electronic medium or machine readable
form without prior written consent from Ensoniq Corp.

The included software products are copyrighted and all rights are reserved by Ensoniq Corp. The
distribution and sale of this product are intended for the use of the original purchaser only and for use only on the
products specified. Lawful users of this product are hereby licensed only to read the programs on the MASOS and
Backup Disks into the memory of a Mirage for the purpose of executing them. Copying, duplicating, selling or
otherwise distributing this product is a violation of the law.

Limited Warranty

Although every effort has been made to insure the accuracy of the text and illustrations in this Guide, no
guarantee is made or implied in this regard.

What is Covered:

This warranty covers all defects in material and workmanship for thiny days from the date of purchase from an
Authorized Ensoniq Dealer.

How to Obtain Warranty Performance:
Return your diskette(s) in their original case to an Authorized Ensoniq Dealer along with proof of purchase.
Defective diskettes will be replaced.

NO CLAIM FOR WARRANTY WILL BE HONORED WITHOUT PROOF OF PURCHASE.

Limitations of Implied Warranties and Exclusion of Certain Damages:

Any implied warranties, including warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose are limited
in duration to the length of this warranty. Ensoniq Corp.'s liability, for any defective product, is limited to
repair or replacement of the product.

Ensonlq Corp. shall not be liable under any circumstances for:

Damages based upon inconvenience, loss of use of diskettes, loss of time, interrupted operation or
commercial loss.

Any other damages, whether incidental, consequential or otherwise, except damages which may not be
excluded under applicable law.

Some states do not allow limitations on how long an implied warranty lasts and/or do not allow the exclusion or
limitation of incidental or consequential damages, so the above limitations and exclusions may not apply to
you.

This warranty gives you specific legal rights and you may also have other rights which may vary from state to
state.

“Apple and Apple Ile are registered trademarks of Apple Computer Corporation.

--- Page 3 ---

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION

PART | - UNDERSTANDING THE MIRAGE
VOICE ARCHITECTURE
ABOUT DIGITAL SAMPLING
THE MASOS DISK

PART Il - MIRAGE PARAMETERS
SELECTING WAVESAMPLES
OSCILLATOR CONTROLS
KEYBOARD WAVESAMPLE ASSIGNMENT
MEMORY ALLOCATION
LOOPING

RELATIVE TUNING, AMPLITUDE AND FILTER PARAMETERS__

SAMPLING PARAMETERS
WAVESAMPLE OPERATIONS
MASOS DATA MANIPULATION FUNCTIONS

PART Ill - SAMPLING TUTORIAL
EXAMPLE 1: SAMPLING AN ORCHESTRA HIT FROM A
RECORD
EXAMPLE 2: SAMPLING A SYNTHESIZER OR GUITAR
WITH A SHORT LOOP
EXAMPLE 3: MULTISAMPLING A DRUM SET
EXAMPLE 4: CROSS-FADE DIGITAL SYNTHESIS

PART IV - ADVANCED SAMPLING TECHNIQUES
SAMPLING TERMS
SAMPLE RATE
ALIASING
QUANTIZATION
LOOPING
SAMPLING TECHNIQUES
SAMPLE DATA FORMAT
QUICK ADVICE
DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING

APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - TABLES
Mirage Sample Rates
Sample Rates for Equi-tempered Pitches
Internal Input Filter Cutoff Frequency
External Filter Cutoff Frequency

APPENDIX B - MIRAGE ADVANCED SAMPLING OPERATING

SYSTEM (MASOS)

APPENDIX C - MIRAGE MASOS MIDI IMPLEMENTATION 1.0 _

APPENDIX D - MIRAGE MID! IMPLEMENTATION 1.1
APPENDIX E - MASOS PARAMETER SETTINGS

aoomn

10
12
17
18
19
22
24
26

70
73
74

77
82

103

--- Page 4 ---

INTRODUCTION

The Mirage is an eight-voice digital sampling keyboard combining the
complexity and accuracy of digital sounds with an analog synthesizer section which
provides programmable control over filtering, envelopes and modulation. Digital
sounds can be tailored to a player's taste while the velocity-sensitive keyboard adds
new dimensions in creative expression. The Mirage Musician's Manual, which comes
with the instrument, is the introduction to operating the Mirage. This Advanced
Sampler's Guide is for musicians who have experience using the Mirage and want to
make original sounds for the instrument. It covers the challenging process of sampling
sounds, along with many fine points of the Mirage and its hidden capabilities. It is an
introduction to digital sampling and a reference manual for the Mirage.

Enclosed with this guide is a disk which contains the Mirage Advanced Sampling
Operating System (MASOS). The MASOS disk is a special tool for the advanced
user. It features new commands for manipulating sounds and supports the Input
Sampling Filter and personal computer-based Visual Editing System. Use the
MASOS disk for sampling, then store your samples on ENSONIQ Formatted Diskettes
available from your dealer. This book also contains the reference manual for MASOS.

Part |- Understanding the Mirage, is an overview. It assumes the reader is
familiar with analog synthesis as it shows how the Mirage is similar to, and quite
different from, a conventional synthesizer. It introduces the vocabulary of digital
sampling.

Part Il- Mirage Parameters, delves into the details of the Program,
Wavesample and Sampling controls: why they are there, what they do, and how they
are used.

Part Ill- Sampling Tutorial, gets to the heart of the matter - how to make good
samples. This is a step-by-step guide through four different sampling situations. It
progresses from a simple unlooped sound to Multisampling.

Part IV - Advanced Sampling Techniques, contains the most complicated
details about sampling, in theory and in practice. It explains the many techniques and
special considerations involved in creating your own sounds on the Mirage.

It is surprisingly easy to come up with wonderful sounds on the Mirage, even from
the most modest sound sources. It is only necessary to understand a little about how
the Mirage works and some simple sampling techniques. The reproduction of natural
sounding acoustic instruments, on the other hand, is sometimes extremely difficult - it is
an art, not ascience. As with studio recording, mastery takes a sensitive ear, a good
understanding of the process, experience and a good deal of patience.

--- Page 5 ---

PART | - UNDERSTANDING THE MIRAGE

The Mirage is different from conventional synthesizers in a fundamental way.
Synthesis is the creation of sounds by combining basic building blocks of sound. The
synthesizer can imitate acoustic sounds by approximating their shape and tonal color.
A digital sampling keyboard, like the Mirage, is more similar to a tape recorder; it
records sound and plays it back. The recording is made in digital memory, rather than
on tape. The Mirage can then shift the pitch of the recording by changing the playback
rate. This is exactly like changing the speed of a tape recorder; the faster the tape, the
higher the pitch. This single feature sets the Mirage apart from all synthesizers that
are based on oscillators with fixed waveforms (even those with digitally generated
waveforms). To make digital sampling useful musically, it is important to let the
performer control the sound and modify it. The Mirage gives the musician expressive
control with a velocity sensitive keyboard and synthesizer-like modification of the
sound, with the familiar Filters, Envelope Generators, and LFO's.

VOICE ARCHITECTURE

The Mirage has eight sound-producing channels, called Voices. When a key is
pressed, one voice is called into play. It is given a set of explicit instructions about how
to play a note. These instructions are based on what Program is selected, what key
was pressed and how hard it was hit. A Program (or patch) is a set of parameters
which affect all voices assigned to that program.

Each voice is made up of two Digital Oscillators, one Low Frequency
Oscillator (LFO), a Mixer and Digitally Controlled Amplifier (DCA), a
Voltage-Controlled Filter (VCF), and two Envelope Generators. They are
permanently set in a standard synthesizer configuration, with the LFO feeding both
oscillators, the oscillators going into the filter, one envelope modulating the filter, and
the other controlling the volume. However, the digital oscillators in the Mirage are
quite different from conventional oscillators.

Digital Oscillators

We use the term ‘Oscillator’ loosely to mean a sound generator. While a
conventional oscillator will repeat the same waveform over and over, thereby giving it a
frequency, the Mirage plays back a recording of a sound. If the original sound had a
pitch, then the output of the Mirage oscillator will have a pitch. Likewise, if the original
sound had little pitch content, as with a cymbal or a gunshot, the output will be
unpitched. What the Mirage oscillators do is transpose the sound up or down. They do
this by changing the rate at which the recording is played back.

--- Page 6 ---

KEYBOARD /
MASTER TUNE/

OSCILLATOR 1

PITCH BEND
w AVES AMPLE RESONANCE
FREQ wilh ere A —

DEPTH

BSEILLATOR 2 | | |
WAVESAMPLE [_
DETUNE

Wavesamples

The digital recordings used in the Mirage are called Wavesamples. When a key
is pressed, each oscillator is told to play back one wavesample. When both oscillators
play the same wavesample, the resulting sound can have a flanged or chorus effect.
The oscillators can also play two different wavesamples, giving a variety of mixing and
layering effects.

Wavesamples can use different amounts of memory. There is a fixed amount of
memory in the Mirage, but it can be divided into as many as 16 different wavesamples.
The length of the wavesample in memory can be deceptive; through looping , evena
short sample will sustain forever (or as long as you care to hold the key down).

Mixing
The output of the two oscillators are combined in a special Mixer which also

controls the final volume of the sound. The mix can be controlled by the velocity of a
key or by the mod-wheel. The output of the mixer then feeds the filter.

3

--- Page 7 ---

Mix Mode and Chorus Mode

The two oscillators of each voice usually play the same wavesample. This is
Chorus Mode; by detuning the second oscillator slightly, the two oscillators will beat
against each other causing a phasing effect. Mix Mode is the alternative to Chorus
Mode. In Mix Mode, the two oscillators play two different wavesamples (Oscillator 1
uses the odd numbered wavesamples and Oscillator 2 the even). This can produce a
variety of effects, especially when the mix between the two is varied. For example, the
mix between a clean guitar and a distorted guitar can be controlled by the velocity.
Layering of two sounds, such as saxes and trumpets, can be balanced with the mod
wheel.

In Mix Mode, as in Chorus Mode, the second oscillator can be detuned and the
mix and mix modulation work the same way in both modes. The only difference
between the two modes is in which wavesample the second oscillator plays.

Low Frequency Oscillator

The LFO in each Mirage voice modulates the pitch of the two oscillators for
vibrato. The waveform is a triangle wave. The amplitude can be preset in a program
or it can by controlled from the mod-wheel.

Filter

Each Mirage voice incoprorates a 4-pole Voltage-Controlled Low-Pass Filter with
variable Resonance. The filter serves three functions: It filters out unwanted
by-products of digital oscillators, called aliases, which are a kind of high-frequency
noise. The filter is driven by an envelope generator to provide dynamic control over
the shape of a sound varying from subtle effects (making the piano sound duller as it
fades out), to more obvious frequency sweeps, as in a conventional "synthesizer brass"
sound. Finally, the filter provides velocity-sensitive brightness for the sound.

Envelopes

The two Envelope Generators, one for amplitude and one for the filter, give the
Mirage remarkable touch sensitivity. They are similar to traditional ADSR envelopes,
with the addition of one parameter, the Peak level (APDSR). The seperate Peak
parameter allows more precise velocity control as compared to a simple envelope
amount control. The Peak and Sustain levels are independently velocity sensitive,
allowing a wide variety of dynamic envelope shapes. Additionally, the envelope time
variables - Attack, Decay, and Release - are also modulated in the following ways: the
attack time can decrease with higher velocity; the decay time can decrease with
keyboard position and the release time can be affected by how fast you lift up a key.

4

--- Page 8 ---

ABOUT DIGITAL SAMPLING

The key feature of the Mirage is its ability to sample any sound and play it back
on the keyboard. The word ‘sample’, in this sense, means to record, much like a tape
recorder. Anything which provides a standard audio output can be used as a source:
a microphone, a record player, a tape recorder, an electric guitar, etc.

The idea of sampling is very simple. Sound is vibration; the exact details of the
vibration give each sound its unique character. A phonograph represents these
vibrations by a series of hills and valleys inside the groove of a record. Sampling is a
way of representing vibrations with a series of numbers.

Almost everyone has seen a representation of sound as a squiggly line across a
page. Time goes across the page, from left to right, and the ‘hills and valleys’ are the
amplitude of the signal at each particular instant in time.

The whole idea of sampling is that time can be broken up into thousands of tiny
steps; this is calledTime Quantization. |f we make these steps smaller and smaller,
we eventually get to a point where we can't tell the difference between all of these
steps and a smooth, continuous sound waveform.

Amplitude #

Continuous Signal

141111

Analog-to-Digital Conversion

--- Page 9 ---

Each of these time steps is represented by a number. The number is the
amplitude of the waveform at that instant. This is accomplished with what is, for us, a
black box, called an analog-to-digital converter (A/D). The analog signal goes in one
end, and numbers come out the other. We can control how fast these numbers come
out of the A/D--this is called the sample rate. For each step, the A/D produces a
number by measuring the current amplitude of the signal; it “samples” it.

In the Mirage, we store all of these numbers, or samples, in a computer-type
digital memory, where we can fetch them easily. Each time a key is pressed, the
Mirage reverses the process to play a sound (see the following figure). The numbers
are taken from memory, in the same order they went in, and sent to another black box:
a digital-to-analog converter (D/A) which converts the numbers back into an analog
signal. The rate at which these numbers are converted is called the output sample
rate. The recreated analog signal is smoothed out with a filter, and becomes sound

when it reaches a loudspeaker.
FILTER MEMORY

FILTER BA MEMORY

Sampling:

Playback:

Aliasing

When the signal comes out of the D/A converter, it has square edges because the
signal amplitude stays fixed until the next sample comes out, at which time it jumps to
that value. These square edges create a roughness to the sound, as they create
additional high harmonics which were not in the original signal. This generation of
false frequencies is called aliasing (one frequency is masquerading as another - an
alias). One purpose of the output low-pass filter is to remove these aliases. It does this
by smoothing the sharp edges created by the D/A converter.

Aliasing can also occur at the input when a sound is being sampled. This
happens when the sound contains frequencies which are higher than one-half the
sample rate. To prevent input aliasing, the input signal must also be filtered. If a high
frequency creeps in, it gets converted into a low frequency automatically and cannot be
seperated from the real signal. This is illustrated graphically in the next figure.

--- Page 10 ---

Sample Rate

Resulting
Alias

Sampling too slowly causes high frequencies to be misrepresented
as low frequencies!

A common example of aliasing occurs in motion pictures; specifically Westerns.
Movies are filmed and projected at 24 frames per second; which means that every 1/24
of a second the camera "sampled" the scene. During projection, our eyes act as filters
by blurring one frame into the next, giving the illusion of continuous motion. When a
wagon wheel starts to turn, the camera has no problem capturing it in enough different
positions so that we see it turning. As the wagon starts to speed up, we see a curious
thing. The wheels seem to slow down, stop, and then go backward. This is aliasing;
we are sampling one frequency and getting a different one on film. Suppose, for
example, there are twenty four spokes in the wheel. When the wheel is going around
exactly once per second, each frame will show a different spoke in the twelve o'clock
position. To the untrained eye, of course, it looks like the same spoke, still in the same
position: it appears as if the wheel isn't moving at all.

Sampling in the Mirage

The Mirage is designed to make sampling easy for the novice, yet provide great
flexibility for the advanced user. One simple software switch, parameter 77, User
Multisampling, opens the door to a world of creative sampling.

Normally, with the Multisampling switch set to OFF, the Mirage will use a set of
default parameter settings when sampling. In this case, sampling a sound is as easy
as plugging in a sound source and pressing two buttons: SAMPLE and ENTER.
When the Multisampling switch is ON, however, the defaults can be altered: the Mirage
will sample where, when, and how you want it to. You can start with the defaults and
try changing one thing at a time: sample rate, sample length, loops, tuning, keyboard
divisions, etc. Rather than assume that it knows the best way to do things, the Mirage
gives the musician complete control over every detail of the sound.

7

--- Page 11 ---

THE MASOS DISK

The Operating System is the computer program that controls the Mirage from the
inside. It determines what happens when any key or button is pressed on the Mirage.
One of the advantages of the Mirage is that the Operating System is stored on diskette
along with the sounds. The Operating System is loaded, or booted when the machine
is first turned on (The verb "to boot" is computer-eze for "to load the very first program”.
It comes from the paradoxical aphorism of “lifting one's self up by one's bootstraps”.).
This means that the diskette you boot from determines what features the Mirage will
have. Normally, you should boot from your sound diskette with the highest version
number written along the bottom of the label, e.g. “Mirage OS Version n.n".

The Mirage Advanced Sampling Operating System (MASOS) is an alternative
master disk for the Mirage. To use MASOS, the machine must boot up with the
MASOS disk. (That means that the MASOS disk should be the first disk inserted in the
machine after you have turned the Mirage on).

The sequencer will not work when you are using MASOS; instead the program
implements new features which are useful to the advanced sampler. Any sounds
developed using MASOS are completely compatible with the normal Mirage Operating
System, (which does have the sequencer). Therefore you can create sounds with the
MASOS disk and store them on standard Mirage Formatted Diskettes.

MASOS will enable you to:

- copy a wavesample to another part of memory, upper or lower

- copy any section of memory

- fade in or fade out any waveform

- scale the amplitude of a waveform with a smooth ramp

- add two waveforms together

- invert, reverse, and replicate any waveform

- rotate a wavesample by any number of samples in one operation

The operation of these new features is described in Appendix B. MASOS retains
all the features of the standard Mirage Operating System except the sequencer. Most
of the examples in this book do not require MASOS; those that do will remind you of
this fact.

MASOS is required in order to use the optional ENSONIQ Input Sampling
Filter, which provides sample rates up to 50 Khz and a 7 pole input filter for eniianced
sampling capabilities. MASOS also provides additional MIDI features. These alos. a
personal computer to access wavesamples and change individual prog. 7
parameters . ENSONIQ‘s Apple Ii *-based Visual Editing System utilizes tiese
System Exclusive MIDI commands to create a powerful digital sound develop: > vt
system.

--- Page 12 ---

PART Il - MIRAGE PARAMETERS

The Mirage Musician's Manual explains how to execute commands and change
parameters on the Mirage. There are several different kinds of parameters: those
contained in programs, those affecting wavesamples, and global parameters. All of
these are defined in the reference section in the back of the Musician's Manual. This
chapter is an in-depth look at certain parameters and how they relate to one another;
particularly those needed by the advanced sampler.

Throughout this book, parameters will be referenced by their parameter number
in square brackets and, where appropriate, their name; e.g. [36] Filter Cutoff
Frequency. The number in brackets is the number used to access that parameter on
the Mirage front panel.

In Mirage terminology, a sound is a set of four Programs and eight Wavesamples.
There is always an upper and a lower sound present in the machine. It is sometimes
misleading to refer to upper and lower keyboard, since certain lower sounds can cover
the entire keyboard. Nevertheless, the upper and lower sounds are usually each
available on half the keyboard.

When dealing with parameters, one thing to keep in mind is which set of
parameters you are working with. First, are you currently on upper or lower? Within
that half, you can modify only the currently selected program and the currently selected
wavesample. Pressing the 0/PROG key shows the current half and program; the
value of [26] Wavesample Select is the current wavesample.

Now let's look at the parameters that are most important to the advanced
sampler. We will continue to use square brackets to show the number of a parameter
when it is mentioned. For example, [26] Wavesample Select.

SELECTING WAVESAMPLES

Select Upper Wavesample SEQ REC (MASOS only)
Select Lower Wavesample SEQ PLAY (MASOS only)

When using MASOS, the Sequencer REC and PLAY buttons have new
functions. It is frequently necessary to switch between wavesamples when sampling.
To speed this task, the REC button becomes a Select Upper Wavesample key
and the PLAY button becomes Select Lower Wavesample. Pressing one of these
buttons, followed by a number key between 1 and 8, will select that wavesample. For
example: if you are on lower wavesample #2, pressing Select Upper Wavesample
(REC), followed by the 8 key, selects upper keyboard wavesample #8. To accomplish
this with the standard (non-MASOS) operating system, requires more effort: press 0
twice to switch to upper, hit CANCEL, select [26] and VALUE to view the current
upper wavesample number, then use the “up-arrow " key to push the value up to eight.

9

--- Page 13 ---

OSCILLATOR CONTROLS
[28] Mix Mode

Each time a key is pressed, two oscillators start playing. Each oscillator is
assigned a wavesample. In Chorus Mode ([28] off), they are both assigned the same
wavesample. When Mix Mode is on, however, they play two different wavesamples.
Oscillator 2 will always get the next higher numbered wavesample. If Oscillator 1 uses
wavesample #5, then Oscillator 2 gets wavesample #6, etc. In either mode, there are
still two oscillators sounding, and the other mix parameters will control their relative
volumes. When the mix [34] is set to 0, we hear only Oscillator 1; when it is set to 63,
we hear only Oscillator 2. In the middie, around 32, we hear both.

In Mix Mode, a voice will use two wavesamples, but not all the parameters of the
second wavesample affect the sound. The second wavesample's parameter settings
for [67] and [68] the Relative Tuning parameters, [69] Relative Amplitude, [70]
Relative Filter Freq and [72] Top Key are ignored and the settings for the first
wavesample are used for both.

[33] Osc 2 Detune

The detune parameter always raises the pitch of the second oscillator. Lower
values create a chorusing or phasing effect. The effect can only be heard when the
mix [34] is near the middle (around 32).

[34] Osc Mix
[35] Osc Mix Velocity Sensitivity

Osc Mix [34] and Mix Velocity Sens. [35] work together. A fixed mix between
the oscillators is set by [34] and any modulation from [35] is added to this (see the
following figure). In the simplest configuration, [35] is set to 1, giving no modulation.
[34] will now be the only control of the mix between the two oscillators. If [35] is
increased, it will allow the velocity to bias the mix toward the second oscillator. This
modulation occurs in addition to the fixed mix amount set by [34]. The one special

case is when [35] is set to 0. Now [34] is ignored and the mix is entirely controlled by
the mod wheel.

10

--- Page 14 ---

OSCILLATOR 1

OSCILLATOR 2
“WAVESAMPLE [~

Lt. ba, A
ay an fe, Aan

FIXED MIX
Parameter [34]

VELOCITY /WHEEL MODULATION
Parameter [35]

There are four basic ways to use the mix controls, as shown in the next figure.

1) In the single oscillator mode, the mix [34] is set to 0, so that only Oscillator 1
will sound. Mix velocity sensitivity [35] is set to 1, giving no velocity sensitivity.

2) In chorusing mode, the mix [34] between the oscillators controls the amount
of chorusing; the maximum effect is heard when it is in the middle, a value of 32. The
proper setting of detune [33] will depend on the octave of the sound and the effect
desired. Very low values produce more of a "flanging" effect.

3) In velocity mixing, the mix [34] will set the balance for a note with minimum
velocity. Higher velocities will send the mix towards Oscillator 2. Obviously if the mix
[34] is already set to 63, the modulation will have no effect. The mix velocity sensitivity
can be adjusted to give the desired amount of mix for the highest velocity note.

4) In mod wheel mixing ([35] set to zero), the mix [34] has no effect.
An interesting variation on the above uses method 3) or 4) but with Mix Mode

[28] turned off. In this case the chorusing of the two oscillators will only be heard
when a key is hit hard or when the mod wheel is turned.

Single Oscillator
Chorusing

Velocity Mixing
Wheel sted

11

--- Page 15 ---

KEYBOARD WAVESAMPLE ASSIGNMENT

It is not always easy to determine which wavesample is being played by a
particular key. This is because each wavesample has some say in how it is used, and
it may be necessary to look at several wavesamples to get the whole story.

The basic scheme is that the wavesamples are used consecutively, and each
wavesample controls the highest key that it will use. This arrangement allows lower
numbered wavesamples to "hide" higher numbered ones. This can cause confusion,
so take a few minutes to understand how the Mirage picks a wavesample for each key.

[72] Top Key (of each wavesample)

Top Key [72] is the most important parameter in the keyboard assignment.
There is a Top Key for each of the 16 wavesamples--this is the number of the highest
key claimed by that wavesample. Each wavesample tries to claim all the keys from the
lowest one on the keyboard up to its Top Key value. Each key normally gets assigned
to only one wavesample. The wavesamples are considered in order, and the first one
to claim a key ‘wins’ it. That means if the first wavesample claims all 61 keys, then it
gets them all, regardless of the other wavesamples.

This is the order in which wavesamples are assigned keys:

first: lower wavesamples 1 through 8
then: upper wavesamples 1 through 8

The lower wavesamples take precedence over the upper wavesamples. On
each half, upper and lower, the wavesamples are taken in numerical order.

As an example of how keyboard assignment works, see the following figure.
Lower wavesample #1 has a Top Key of 31. Since it gets first pick, it claims all the
keys from 1 to 31. Wavesample # 2 has a Top Key of 10, so it will be hidden by #1.
The Mirage then looks at wavesample #3 for a Top Key greater than 31. Since it is not
greater (it is also 31), #3 will also be ignored. All 8 of the lower wavesamples will be
searched, looking for one that wants to play key 32. When all the lower wavesamples
are assigned (or ignored), the same process begins for the upper keyboard. Upper
wavesample #1 has a Top Key of 40, so keys 32 through 40 will use it. Wavesample
#2 has a top-key of 61, so keys 40 through 61 use #2. At this point it really doesn't
matter what the rest of the Top Keys are; they can't be higher than 61 as this is the
highest key on the keyboard.

12

--- Page 16 ---

Split Point

Attempting to change the upper/lower split point can cause some confusion. In
the above example, we would probably be able to hear that the split occurs between
keys 31 and 32. Suppose we wanted the split to be lower, at, say, key 25. Looking at
wavesample #1, we see it has a Top Key of 31, so we bring it down to 25. What we
didn't realize is, lurking behind #1 was #3, also with a Top Key of 31. Instead of
hearing the upper keyboard sound, keys 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 have a sound we
may have never heard before. Don't be dismayed; it's only Lower wavesample #3 with
whatever parameters were left in it when it was last used. Lowering wavesample #3's
Top Key to 25 or less will solve the problem.

The key assignment is complicated by two more parameters: [28] Mix Mode
and [27] Initial Wavesample . They both affect which wavesamples will be allowed
to claim keys on the keyboard when the keyboard wavesample assignment is made.

[28] Mix Mode - Effect on keyboard assigment

As we have seen, in mix mode the two oscillators play different wavesamples. In
this case the wavesamples are assigned in pairs. Oscillator 2 always uses the
wavesample of Oscillator 1 plus gne. The Top Key of Oscillator 2's wavesample is
ignored. The Mirage will gang the wavesamples together in pairs; 1 and 2, 3 and 4,
etc. It will only look at the Top Key of every other wavesample: 1, 3,5, and 7. In short:
if Mix Mode [28] is on, then wavesamples are assigned in pairs, and only every other
Top Key is considered.

13

--- Page 17 ---

[27] Initial Wavesample

The Initial Wavesample [27] is a Program parameter. It is the first wavesample to
be considered in the wavesample assignment process. In the above example, we
assumed that it was set to 1 for both the lower and upper keyboard. If we set Initial
Wavesample [27] to 3 on the lower keyboard, then the Mirage would look first at
Lower wavesample #3, see that it had a Top Key of 31, and assign all the keys from 1
to 31 to wavesample #3. From there it would go on to look at wavesample #4, #5, etc.
Wavesample 1 and 2 would be ignored, no matter what their Top Key was.
Wavesamples with a number below the value of the initial wavesample parameter [27]
(on each half) are not considered for keyboard allocation.

This parameter allows the four programs to switch between completely different
wavesamples, allowing completely different sounds for each program. For example,
lower programs 1, 2, 3, and 4 could be set to have an initial wavesample of 1, 2, 3, and
4, respectively. If the Top Key of each of those wavesamples is 31, they will all try to
claim the first 31 keys. On program 1, wavesample #1 gets first dibs, and claims all 31
keys; wavesample #2, #3, and #4 are hidden. On program 2, wavesample #2 will get
the same 31 keys instead. Meanwhile wavesample #3 and #4 will be hidden. Each
program will have a different wavesample for keys 1 through 31.

For added fun, those four wavesamples could have different Top Key values, so
the split point between upper and lower could vary with the program also.

There are four basic types of keyboard wavesample assignments:

1) Single Wavesample (per half)

This is the simplest arrangement, with a single wavesample on each half of the
keyboard. This is the default assignment; It occurs automatically when a sound is

sampled and Multisampling [77] is off.

Lower Upper

[27] Initial Wavesample 1 1
[28] Mix Mode OFF OFF
[72] Top Key - wavesample #1 31 61

—KEYBOARD

Lower —————— A ——_ — —_— — SPLIT

11 11 #11 91 «=1 11644 Binh lalaes
MVEMRERMERERERERD Cccrunrosorinnnyg NUMBER

14

--- Page 18 ---

2) Multisample

There are a large number of variations on this, depending on how many different
wavesamples are desired across the keyboard.

Lower Upper

[27] Initial Wavesample 1 1
[28] Mix Mode OFF OFF
[72] Top Key - wavesample #1 16 45
[72] Top Key - wavesample #2 31 61

—KEYBOARD
—SPLIT
11 2 2 2 11 112 22 222 WAVES AMPLE
111174111122 Pepyiiiiiiii2222222222\- NUMBER
3) Mix Mode Multisample
In mix mode, each key is assigned two wavesamples.
Lower Upper
[27] Initial Wavesample 1 1
[28] Mix Mode ON ON
[72] Top Key - wavesample #1 16 45
[72] Top Key - wavesample #2 XX XX (= don't care)
[72] Top Key - wavesample #3 31 61
[72] Top Key - wavesample #4 XX XX

ME it 113 335 333 Joc,
411111111 3333333333 WAVESAMPLE
WETETEME ME) 22022 224 44 «444 NUMBER
WEEP EEE EE 2 22222224444444444

—OSC 2

15

--- Page 19 ---

4) Program Variable Assignment

This method takes advantage of Initial Wavesample [27], which allows different
wavesample assignments for different Programs.

In this example, lower program 1 dominates the entire keyboard. Lower program
2 only takes half the keyboard, allowing the upper sound to have the top half. Lower
program 1 starts with wavesample #1, which goes all the way up to key 61. Lower
program #2 has an initial wavesample of 2, so wavesample #1 is ignored.
Wavesample #2 only goes up to key 31, and so the upper sound is 'revealed’.

Lower Upper

[27] Init Wavesample - Prog 1 1 1
[72] Top Key - wavesample #1 61 61
[27] Init Wavesample - Prog 2 2 1
[72] Top Key - wavesample #2 31 61

—KEYBOARD

—— Lower

—SPLIT
11 419 11 PHP FT ATE TH T11 11 Rv avesanpcc fProsan'
RRR RRR RRR RE RRR RRR RRR’ = NUMBER

——_———. 4 ———__ Upper ——_—__— SPLIT
22: (Dee v avesavpce Prsran?
poet i iiii11i1i1t1i111111 1)" _uMBER

16

--- Page 20 ---

MEMORY ALLOCATION

Each Mirage sound, both upper and lower, has 65,536 bytes of memory to hold
the wavesamples. In computer lingo, that number is also called 64K, which rolls off the
tongue a bit better. This 64K bytes is broken into 256 equal units in the Mirage, called
Pages. A page, in turn, is made up of 256 bytes, or samples. And yes, if you multiply
256 by 256, you get 65,536.

All of this memory is divided up among the eight wavesamples in each sound.
The allocation of memory to each wavesample has nothing to do with the assignment
of wavesamples to keys on the keyboard. For example, Wavesample #1 could be as
short as 2 pages, but be active over the entire keyboard. Wavesample #8 could be a
full 256 pages, but only play on one key (not very useful, but possible). A common
memory allocation is one where two wavesamples are active and each one gets half of
the 64K of memory.

Note that in the Mirage, we count pages in the base-sixteen number system,
called Hexadecimal (see the Appendix). This turns out to be quite handy for dealing
with things that have 256 divisions, like computer memory, but it takes getting used to.

Memory can be thought of as a strip 256 units long. To do multi-sampling, we
have to decide how to divide up this strip. For each wavesample we want to use, we
must devote a length of memory to it.

[60] Wavesample Start
[61] Wavesample End

To allocate memory to a wavesample, we simply set up the Wavesample Start
[60] and Wavesample End [61] parameters. Wavesample End tells us what the last
page of the sample is. If a wavesample starts on page 1 and ends on page 2, then it is
exactly two (not one) page long. Likewise if it starts on page 0 and ends on page 2, it
is 3 pages long.

17

--- Page 21 ---

For simplicity, it is a good idea to have wavesamples start on nice even
Hexadecimal boundaries, like 40, 80, or CO. To get the maximum use of memory, end
the wavesample one page before the start of the next wavesample in memory. For
example, if wavesample #1 starts at 00 and another wavesample starts at 40, then set
the end [61] of the first wavesample at 3F.

It is possible, but sometimes dangerous, to allocate the same memory to two
different wavesamples, or to overlap wavesamples. The Mirage does not check, for
example, that wavesample #1 ends at 40, and will allow you to move the start of
wavesample #2 to a number less than 40. If a loop marker is present in either
wavesample, strange things can happen (see Sample Data Format in Part IV).

The wavesample start and end parameters tell the Mirage where in memory to
record the new sound when you sample. They also tell it what section of memory to
play when a key goes down. If you move Wavesample End [61] after you have
sampled a sound, it will not truncate the end of the sound unless you turn the Loop
Switch [65]_on and then off. This inserts an "end of sound" marker in the memory.

LOOPING

[62] Loop Start

[63] Loop End

[64] Loop End Fine Adj.
[65] Loop Switch

Many musical instruments are able to sustain notes over a long period of time. In
contrast, a drum sound will always die away quickly. In the Mirage, sustained sounds
are usually Looped. This means that after the initial attack, a portion of the sound is
played over and over until the key is lifted and the sound dies away. This conserves
memory, allowing many different wavesamples in the machine at one time.

The Loop pointers - Loop Start, Loop End and Loop End Fine Adjust - determine
where in the sound (wavesample) the loop will occur. As with Wavesample Start and
Wavesample End, these parameters are in Hexadecimal. Loop Start is the first page of
the loop, Loop End is the last. When Loop Start equals Loop End, the loop is one
page long. Loop End Fine Adjust is slightly different; it selects which sample (byte), of
the 256 in the last page of the loop, will be the last sample. It is normally set to FF, that
is, the last sample in the page selected by Loop End. Note that for certain values of
Loop End [63], Loop End Fine Adjust [64] will not go below 80. This is normal.

[65], the Loop Switch, can be on or off. When off, the sound will play once, from
Wavesample Start to Wavesample End, and then stop. When on, the sound will play
from Wavesamples Start to Loop End; then begin again at Loop Start and continue
playing to Loop End over and over. The amplitude envelope will determine when the
sound stops after the you release a key.

18

--- Page 22 ---

The loop switch serves one other function, which has to do with truncating
sounds. If you have a sound which is not looped, then all of the sound will be played
out to the Wavesample End. If you try to make it shorter by moving Wavesample End,
the sound will not obey until you turn the Loop Switch on and off again.

In Part 4 - Advanced Sampling Techniques, further details of looping are
covered.

RELATIVE TUNING, AMPLITUDE AND FILTER PARAMETERS

[67] Relative Tuning Coarse (octaves)
[68] Relative Tuning Fine (1/256 octave steps)

The Mirage changes the playback rate of a wavesample as you play different
keys. The resultant sound may or may not have a pitch, and if it does, the Mirage does
not "know" what it is. For example, if you sang a major scale, starting on C, and
sampled it into the upper keyboard of the Mirage, hitting one key will play back the
whole scale, made up of eight different pitches. The Mirage will transpose that sound
up or down, depending on which key you hit. The Mirage does not know what pitch, or
group of pitches, are in its memory; all it can do is blindly shift them up or down.

When you press a key and the sound comes out at the same pitch as the original
sound, we Say that this is Unity playback rate. It means that the samples are coming
out at the same speed they went in. Any note below unity rate plays the sound slower
(therefore lower in pitch) and any note above unity rate plays faster (and higher).

Note that Unity is when the playback (output) sample rate matches the input
sample rate. The default input sample rate for the Mirage is 29.4 KHz. The middle A
key of the Mirage upper keyboard produces an output (playback) sample rate of 29.4
Khz. If we sample a sound at the default rate, (and the User Multisampling Switch [77]
is off) then Unity playback rate occurs when we play the A key. If we change the input
sample rate, the A key will no longer produce Unity playback rate. For example, if we
sampled our little C scale with a sample rate of 25 Khz (Sample Time [73] = 40) then
playing it back at 29.4 Khz would cause it to be faster, and two half steps higher in
pitch. To play it back at unity we must hit the G key in the middle of the upper keyboard.

The important concept is that the Mirage can only control relative pitch. It is up to
the user to adjust each sample into concert pitch. Suppose we had sampled a C major
scale at the default sample rate. When we play the A key we hear aC scale. When we
play the C three keys above A, the sound is transposed up a minor third, so we hear an
E-flat scale. Now we want to tune the wavesample so that when we play the C key, we
hear a C scale. Here is where [67] and [68], Relative Coarse and Fine Tune, come
into play. We simply bring the fine tune parameter down until the sample comes into
tune on the C key (Note that you must restrike the key in order to hear the new setting).
Use a known-to-be-in-tune sound on the opposite half of the keyboard to compare (If

19

--- Page 23 ---

you prefer to play with numbers, you could, instead, calculate how much to change it; a
minor third is one quarter of an octave,which is 64 fine-tune steps (256/4). In Hex
that's 40, so move it from 84 down to 44).

Remember the final pitch of a sound is determined by several factors: the original
pitch of the sound; the input sample rate; the relative tuning of the wavesample; the key
pressed on the keyboard; the pitch wheel and any LFO modulation.

As you learn more about sampling you will find that, for sounds with short loops,
its often best to leave Relative Tuning Fine set at 80, and adjust the input sample rate
or the pitch of the sound source to bring things in tune. More on that in the section on
sample rates in Part IV.

[69] Relative Amplitude
[70] Relative Filter Freq
[71] Maximum Filter Freq

Multisampled sounds are those which have more than one wavesample. Since
the program parameters affect all the wavesamples at the same time, we need some
way of adjusting individual wavesamples so that they fit-in together. The Relative
Amplitude and Filter parameters do just that; they affect only one wavesample.

Relative Amplitude [69] is normally set to 63. By bringing it down, you attenuate
the selected wavesample with respect to the other wavesamples in that half of the
memory.

Relative Filter Frequency [70] is normally set to 20. It has the same effect as the
program control of filter frequency [36]; the two are added together to determine the
cutoff frequency of a note. As with [36], itis adjustable in semitone increments.

The Filter cutoff frequency is controlled by many factors (see next figure). The
base cutoff frequency for a voice is determined by adding the Program Cutoff
Frequency [36], the Wavesample Relative Freq [70], and the Filter Keyboard Tracking
[38]. From that base frequency, the filter envelope rises, and its height is velocity
sensitive. With all of these contributing to the filter cutoff frequency, its hard to know
exactly how high the filter may go. Since the Mirage filter has also been charged with
the job of keeping out the unwanted high-frequency aliases, it may occasionally be
undesirable for it to shoot right up to 16 Khz. [71] Maximum Filter Frequency
guards against this. It provides a ceiling on the cutoff frequency. No matter what all
the modulators add up to, the filter will never go above the Max Freq setting. This
parameter is only used if a sound contains undesirable high frequency noises which
would become audible if the filter were wide open (for example, if you sample a sound
at arate less than 29.4 Khz, any sound in the output above half the sample rate can
only be noise). Often this parameter is just set to its maximum value of 99. Max Freq is
in semitone increments.

20

--- Page 24 ---

Note that in Mix Mode, only one set of relative parameters are used; they are
applied to both wavesamples. Oscillator 1's wavesample parameters are active;
Oscillator 2's are ignored.

16 KHz Peak Velocity Mod Parameter [46]

Sustain Velocity Mod Parameter [48]

Wavesample
Relative Fe Parameter [70]

Manual Fe Parameter [36]

20 Hz
The Filter Cutoff Frequency Parameters add to form the actual Fe.

21

--- Page 25 ---

SAMPLING PARAMETERS
[73] Sample Time Adjust

[73] specifies the input sample time, which determines the input sample rate.
Sample rate is the frequency at which we sample. it is a fundamental consideration in
all digital music systems. Another measure of the same thing is sample time; that is,
the time between samples. Sample time is specified in Microseconds
(usec--millionth's of a second), so instead of saying .000034 seconds, we can say 34
usec. That corresponds to a 29,400 Hz sample rate. Often we use Kilohertz
(KHz--thousands of Hertz) for frequencies, so we can say 29.4 KHz. Sample rate and
sample time are inversely proportional. This means that as sample time increases,
sample rate decreases. In the Mirage, we can only specify the sample time; the
sample rate follows from this formula:

Sample Rate in KHz = 1,000
sample time in usec

for example, when sample time is set to 34:

Sample Rate in KHz = 1,000 = 29.4 KHz
34 psec

Appendix A lists all sample rates available on the Mirage. Sample rates above
33 Khz are only available when using the Input Sampling Filter (available from
your dealer) and the MASOS disk.

[74] Input Filter Frequency

The sampling input to the Mirage passes thrcugh an internal 4-pole filter. This
input anti-aliasing filter is a 24 do per octave low-pass filter. Its frequency is adjustable
in semitone steps. Appendix A lists the available internal input filter frequency settings.
The optimum filter setting may vary for different sounds using the same sample rate.

[93] External Input Filter Frequency (MASOS only)

This parameter has been added for use with the optional external Input
Sampling Filter. The value set for this parameter will determine the setting of the
7-pole low-pass input filter according to the values listed in Appendix A. When it is set
to a value of 0, the Mirage will sample through its internal filter and A/D converter.
When set to any other value, the Mirage will sample through the cartridge filter and

22

--- Page 26 ---

A/D. Ifyou are not using the external filter cartridge, you must leave this parameter set
to 0 or you will not be able to sample.

[75] Line/Mic Level Input

[75] is the line/mic switch. The Mirage has two input paths which both use the
same audio input jack on the rear panel. The line/mic switch contols which path is in
use. The Mic level setting (off) increases gain and also puts a compressor on the
signal. This is intended to allow fool-proof quick sampling without too much worry
about overloading the input. The Line level setting (on) should be used for sampling
any electronic instruments, or when connected to the output of a mixer or preamp. This

setting is generally better for percussive sounds because the compressor is not in the
circuit.

Digital systems are sensitive to amplitude levels in two ways. When the signal is
too high, the A/D converter will ‘clip’, giving hard distortion to the sound. When the
signal is too low, it will get buried in quantization noise. The Mirage does not have a
variable input level control, so it is advised that the serious sampler use the Line level
setting and a mixer or preamp with an output level control on the signal source.

[76] Sampling Threshold

[76] sets the level which the input signal must cross in order to trigger sampling.
During level detect mode, the center LED bar will light when the signal crosses the
Sampling Threshold. Pressing ENTER activates the sampling input and sampling will
begin when the signal crosses the threshold.

The threshold level should be adjusted to suit each individual sound so that the
sample starts at the desired spot, without trimming off any of the attack transient.
When set at zero, the signal is always above the threshold; therefore sampling will
begin immediately after pressing the ENTER button. Note that in level detect mode,
when the threshold is set to zero, the middle bar will always be lit.

[77] User Multsampling Switch

The Mirage makes it easy to sample by using a number of default parameter
settings. These parameters are automatically installed whenever a sample is taken
with the User Multisampling switch off. When on, the User Multisampling switch
prevents the Mirage from installing these parameters, leaving them at the values they
were prior to sampling. If you adjust these parameters and wish to retain the new
settings, you must turn multisampling on before you sample or all wavesamples will be
reset to the defaults. The normal setting for serious sampling is on.

23

--- Page 27 ---

The default parameter values are:

[26] Current Wavesample 1
[27] Initial Wavesample 1
[28] Mix Mode OFF

and for all eight wavesamples:

[60] Wavesample Start 00 (Start of memory)
[61] Wavesample End FF (End of memory)
[62] Loop Start FE

[63] Loop End FE

[64] Loop End Fine Adj FF

[65] Loop Switch OFF

[69] Rel Amplitude 63

[72] Topkey 31 for lower, 61 for upper

Sampling once with the Multisampling switch off is a quick way to 'reset' the
wavesamples before doing multisampling. There are subtle problems that arise when
you start working on one wavesample and don't know that some other wavesample
claims it has a loop in the same territory. To avoid this, turn [77] off and do a quick
sample before starting a multisampling project. Then turn [77] on so that the
parameters will not be reset when you begin sampling for real.

Regardless of the setting of the multisampling switch, the wavesample relative
amplitude parameter [69] will be reset to it's maximum value (63) each time you
sample

WAVESAMPLE OPERATIONS
[66] Wavesample Rotate Command

Rotation is the sliding of the waveform sample data to the right or left with respect
to its location in memory. For example, to rotate left by one, the sample that was in
location 02 is put in location 01; the sample that was in 03 is placed in 02, and so forth.
Finally, the last location is filled with the sample that was in location 01. This is called
rotation because the wavesample is treated like a circular buffer; what falls out of one
end is put back in the other.

24

--- Page 28 ---

ROTATE RIGHT

Why would you want to rotate? Loops are very sensitive to the particular sample
values at the splice point. Since a loop must always begin on a page boundary, there
are usually only a few appropriate places for the loop start point. If the sample at the
loop start point doesn't splice cleanly, the particular sample at the start of the page may
be changed by rotating, yielding more possibilities for succesful loop splices.

The MASOS rotate command works differently from the standard Mirage
operating system. If you booted from a standard sound disk, then the command works
as follows:

For each press of the "down arrow" key, the wavesample rotates left by one
sample; for each press of the "up arrow" key, the wavesample rotates right by one
sample.

The rotation may take up to 8 seconds, depending on how big the wavesample
is. The displays will go blank during this time (or leave a segment lit) but don't despair;
the Mirage will return when rotation is complete. To help relieve the slowness of the
one sample rotate, MASOS provides the ability to rotate by any number of samples, up
to 255 (FF Hex). There are two new commands, Rotate Left and Rotate Right, which
operate on the current wavesample.

[19] Rotate Current Wavesample Left by (n) (MASOS only)
[20] Rotate Current Wavesample Right by (n) (MASOS only)

The MASOS rotate commands work as follows:

After selecting a rotate command [19] or [20], the display will flash "rL" or “rr" for
a moment to indicate the direction of rotation, then the number of locations of the
previous rotate will appear. This value can be changed using the up and down arrow
keys. When the correct value is set, pressing the ENTER key will initiate the rotate
function. The display will go blank briefly, then will show “dr" indicating that the
wavesample has been rotated.

25

--- Page 29 ---

Rotating a sound too far to the left will cut off the attack portion of the sound. You
can fix it by rotating it right again, since the data was not discarded but moved to the
end of the wavesample.

Rotating a sound too far to the right may cause a gap before the beginning of the
sound. Actually, the space in front of the sound is filled with the data from the end of
the wavesample. This may or may not be what you had in mind.

[17] Copy Current Wavesample to Lower (n) (MASOS only)
[18] Copy Current Wavesample to Upper (n) (MASOS only)

These commands allow you to copy wavesamples from one half of the Mirage
memory to the other. They can be used to transfer a sound on the lower keyboard to
the upper, or vice versa. To use the Copy command,verify that the wavesample you
would like to copy is currently selected. Next, select the desired Copy command [17]
or [18]. The display will show "U" or "L" and a flashing number. Press the number key
corresponding to the wavesample you wish to copy the current wavesample into.
Finally, press the ENTER key to begin copying. The parameter number will appear
after copying is complete.

MASOS DATA MANIPULATION FUNCTIONS

The following functions are available when using MASOS. They provide a way
of manipulating wavesample data after it has been sampled, but are not restricted to
operating on wavesample boundaries. Since most of these functions will change the
samples in memory, it is strongly advised that you save any sound on a diskette before
attempting to alter it so you can reload it if you make a mistake. You can always save
overtop of this "backup" sound when you are finished.

Each function operates on a section of waveform memory. This section will be
called the Source. Two of the functions, Copy and Add, also use a second section of
memory, the Destination. The Source is determined by the setting of the Source Start
and Source End parameters. The Destination will always be the same length as the
Source, so it does not have an end parameter; only a Destination Start parameter.

The following parameters are pointers which control the range of memory that will
be manipulated. Each pointer is made up of two numbers, which are both displayed in
Hexadecimal. The first half of a pointer is the page number; the second half is the
sample number on that page.

26

--- Page 30 ---

[85] Source Start: page number (normally 00)

[86] Source Start: sample number (normally 00)
[87] Source End: page number (normally 01)
[88] Source End: sample number (normally FF)
[89] Destination Start: page number (normally 00)
[90] Destination Start: sample number (normally 00)
[94] Destination Bank Select (normally LO)

[94] Destination Bank Select sets the upper or lower sound memory bank
as the place to store the results of a Copy or Add function.

[95] Scale Function Start Factor (normally 00)
[96] Scale Function End Factor (normally FF)

These scale factors are used to control the scaling of the sample data by the
Scaling Function. The range of both variables is from 00 to FF (hex).

MASOS Function Key (Load Seq key)

The MASOS special functions are accessed by pressing the MASOS Function
key (which is the Load Seq key when not using MASOS), then pressing the number
which corresponds to the function you wish to perform. A flashing mnemonic message
will appear until you either press the ENTER key to initiate the function, or the
CANCEL key to abort it. When the requested function has been completed, the “Fc"
or Function Complete message will appear.

27

--- Page 31 ---

The following table lists the key numbers and their corresponding MASOS
functions:

MASOS Functions

Function (key) # Mnemonic Description
1 Cd Copy Data from source to destination
2 Fi Fade in from source start to source end
3 Fo Fade out from source start to source end
4 Sc Scale the source data with a linear ramp

function which ramps between scale start
factor and scale end factor.

5 Ad Add source data to destination data;
leave result in destination

6 In Invert the source data
7 rd Reverse data from source start to end
8 rP Replicate first page of the source data on

each page from source start to source end.

These functions are described in more detail in PART IV - ADVANCED
SAMPLING TECHNIQUES (page 66) and in Appendix B.

28

--- Page 32 ---

PART Ill - SAMPLING TUTORIAL

EXAMPLE 1: SAMPLING AN ORCHESTRA "HIT" FROM A RECORD

Recorded music provides a limitless collection of final chords, introductory
splashes, heavy hits and quick punches which can be reproduced on the Mirage.
These sound "events" don't usually need loops and are quite easy to capture.

For this first example, we'll go through all the details of pushing buttons and
setting levels. Later, we'll assume that you know how to initiate sampling and
concentrate on the variations possible with multisampling.

1) Load Upper and Lower sound #1 from your MASOS disk.

Unlike the programs on a Sound disk, the sounds on the MASOS disk (or a blank
Formatted disk) are "templates" for sampling. Sampling into a sound from a Sound
disk (piano, for example) can produce unusual results as your new sampled sound is
processed through the envelope, filter and modulation parameters of the previous
sound. For this reason, you should always load in a sound from the MASOS disk or a
blank Formatted disk before sampling. The parameters are set up in a "plain vanilla”
configuration on all Programs, with a quick Attack, full Sustain, quick Release, no
chorusing, limited filter modulation and velocity control. When you sample, the
Program of the last sound loaded remains in effect for the new sample.

For reference purposes, the values of all parameter settings on the MASOS disk

sounds are listed in Appendix E. You can also use a copy of this form for notating your
own patches.

2) Set the sampling parameters as follows:

PARAMETER VALUE MEANING

[73] Sample Time Adj 34 29.4 KHz sample rate

[74] Input Filter Freq 90 12 KHz cutoff

[75] Line/Mic Level Input ON line level

[76] Sampling Threshold 10 trigger at +/- 10

[77] User Multisampling OFF default wavesample settings

3) Connect the sound source to the Mirage Audio Input jack
on the rear panel.

29

--- Page 33 ---

You will need some way of controlling the output volume of your sound source. If
your source is a Phono Turntable, it will need a preamp with a volume control. You
should take the signal from the “Line (Main)" output, if there is one. The "Tape Out"
jacks on most preamps are not affected by the master volume control or tone controls.
If the preamp has a rumble filter, turn it on (the frequency response of the Mirage
extends to the sub-audio range and it can easily reproduce record warp noise and
motor rumble). Also, put the preamp in Mono, if possible, so the sound from both
stereo channels is captured. You can monitor what you are sampling by plugging the
remaining preamp output into a power amp, but you will be using the preamp volume
contro! to set the sampling level, which could be excessively loud when amplified, so
be sure to use an amp with a separate level control.

Tape Decks are ideal sources as you can easily repeat the sound over and over
(if you are a novice sampler, you will almost certainly need a number of "takes" before
you get what you want) and tape decks often have an output volume control as well. In
fact, if you want to take a sound off of a record, it is advisable to tape the record, then
sample the tape. One way to hook up is to take the “Line (Play ) Out" of one channel
of the tape player directly into the Mirage. The other channel can go to your normal
amplifier so you can hear what's on the tape as you sample it (remember, it might be
loud!). The headphone output of most hi-fidelity portable tape players should work, but
you must have the right connectors to convert the stereo mini-jack output to a mono
phone plug (don't short the outputs directly together!).

If you are using a microphone, you can use the Mic level setting and plug the
unbalanced mic output directly into the Mirage, however you will get better quality by
running the mic through a mixer first. The mixer gives you tone controls, a
low-impedence, low-noise mic preamp, more gain, a volume control, and basically,
more control. You can then add external effects such as compression, EQ, reverb, etc.
In fact, any sound you sample will benefit from the extra control and flexibility provided
by running it through a mixing board.

SED EE,

Turntable Preamp

Mirage

30

--- Page 34 ---

4) Press SAMPLE LOWER (or UPPER) on the Mirage keypad.
The display will flash SL or SU for several seconds, and then enter ‘level-detect

mode’. The LED display has become a bar- graph, showing the level of the signal.

5) Set the output level of your sound source.

LED DISPLAY

ToP BAR —————Peak Level (Clipping) —>
MIDDLE BAR—Thrreshold Level (Normal) >

BOTTOM BAR
DOT.

Adjust the level using the LED display just as you would a tape recorder, to
achieve occasional, but never sustained, peak level. You may have to replay the
section you intend to sample several times to get a good reading (which is why you will
find tape more convenient). If the display does not move at all, check your
connections. If you can't get a high enough level, press CANCEL to leave
level-detect mode and check [75] Line/Mic switch, and [74] Input Filter Freq .
You may need to switch to mic level if your preamp doesn't have enough gain. Be
forewarned that the mic level setting compresses the signal and is about 20 times
more sensitive than the line level setting so you will need to back off the gain. If the
input filter frequency is set extremely low, it may completely filter out the signal.

6) To sample, press the ENTER button on the keypad.

Start your sound source a few seconds ahead of time, and press ENTER just
before the section you want to sample. One of two things will happen in the display,
depending on your signal.

If the 'hit' is preceeded by silence then the display will go blank: the signal has
not crossed the Sampling Threshold yet. When the sound starts, the middle bar should
go on (indicating that sampling has begun), and stay on for about two seconds after
which the display will revert to normal operation. If the sound never crosses the
threshold, then the display will stay blank for about six seconds, then flash "nS" (No
Signal).

If you are sampling a sound which is preceeded by other sounds, the middle bar
will go on as soon as you press ENTER. Sampling starts immediately as the signal
level is already over the threshold. It's up to you to press ENTER at exactly the right
moment. If you really wanted the Mirage to wait for a certain sound and it didn't, then

31

--- Page 35 ---

[76] Sampling Threshold should be set to a higher value. If you are good at
“punching in" with a tape recorder, you should have no problems. If you always seem
to miss the beginning of the sound, you can press ENTER a little early, then trim out
the undesired sound by rotating the wavesample left, or moving the wavesample start
point. Of course you'll waste some memory on this undesired sound, so your sample
time may need to be adjusted in order to capture the entire sound event you want.

7) When "SF" (Sample Finished) appears in the display,
play the keyboard to hear the result.

Since the Multisampling switch [77] was off, you have taken a single sample
over half the keyboard. The center key on the selected half (E for lower, A for upper)
will play back the sound at the same pitch that was sampled. On that key, the sound
will play for 2.2 seconds.

UNITY PLAYBACK FREQUENCY OCCURS IN THE CENTER OF EACH
KEYBOARD HALF.

Now that you have sampled a sound, chances are, its not exactly the way you
wanted it. Let's look at some of the ways you can get closer, either by resampling it or
by adjusting the program parameters.

Readjusting Sampling Parameters
Problem: Attack is cut off or delayed

If you sample a sound with a slow attack and it plays back with a quick attack,
then you may have cut off the beginning of the sound. This can occur when [76]
Sampling Threshold is set too high. On the other hand, if there is a pause between
when you hit a key and when the sound starts, you have sampled a bit of silence
before the attack because the Sampling Threshold value was too low. The threshold
level is usually best at a middle ground, between having it too sensitive, where it will
trigger on any small random noise, and not sensitive enough, where it kicks in too late
and misses the beginning of the sound. A setting of 10 is usually safe, but for best
results you may want to adjust it for each sound you sample.

32

--- Page 36 ---

4
Sample Start SAMPLING THRESHOLD TOO HIGH. Sample End

Noise>

t i
Sample Start SAMPLING THRESHOLD TOO LOW. Sample End

Problem: Decay is cut off or there is noise after the decay.

The Mirage can sample 2.2 seconds of sound at the default sample rate. If that's
not enough time to capture a certain event, you can make it longer by increasing [73]
Sample Time and resampling the sound. Remember this will decrease the sample
rate, therefore decreasing the bandwidth, so there is a trade-off to be made. Usually
you can adjust the filter and amplitude envelopes to cover up the abrupt end of a
sample. If the sound doesn't last for the entire sampling window, you can adjust it in
many ways. You can resample at a higher sampling rate (decrease [73]), giving better
fidelity. You can move back the Wavesample End [61] which leaves more memory for
other samples when multisampling. Finally, you can adjust the envelopes to end the
sound sooner.

4
Sample Start SAMPLE TIME TOO SHORT. Sample End

Sample Start SAMPLE TIME TOO LONG. Sample End

33

--- Page 37 ---

Problem: Distortion

The most common form of distortion is clipping. With a computer graphic display
(provided by the Visual Editing System), it's easy to see. Even without a display,
the sound should be fairly familiar to most musicians who have worked with electronic
equipment. Unlike analog equipment which may overload in a smooth manner ("soft
clipping"), an A/D converter clips in a very hard fashion, producing nasty distortion and
alias noise. Obviously, the solution is to turn down the level of the signal going into the
Mirage. In level-detect mode, the top LED bar lights when the signal reaches the
overload level. You should see occasional peaks, but seeing the top bar lit a lot
indicates an overload condition.

NT
NORMAL CLIPPED

Aliasing is another form of distortion. Input aliasing makes the signal sound
rough or “ratty” and, at extremes, can produce audible frequencies which never
appeared in the input signal. If you sample a sound with a downward sweep in pitch
and hear a rising pitch when you play it back, that's aliasing! There are two solutions to
the problem: either limit the high frequencies coming in, or increase the sample rate
(by decreasing the Sample Time [73]). In general, use as high a sample rate as
possible which still gives you enough time to capture the whole sound. For any given
sample rate, adjust [74] Input Filter Freq to get the best sound. Here are some
guidelines:

The filter setting is related to the sample rate, but not in an absolute way. While a
general rule of thumb is that the filter should be set to a frequency one octave below
the Nyquist frequency (in other words, one quarter of the sample rate--see Part IV), it
really depends on the signal. Signals with very strong ultra-high harmonics will need a
lower setting to eliminate aliasing. Sound sources with inherently limited frequency
response, such as records and tapes, may need very little filtering. The sharp cutoff
slope of the Input Sampling Filter will allow you to sample sounds with strong high
frequency content without excessively limiting the frequency response.

It's worth spending some time training your ear to the effects of aliasing. Try
leaving the Input Filter [74] wide open and bringing the sample rate way down.
Aliasing will make complex sounds raspy or distorted. Aliasing of simple sounds can
create strange low or mid frequency tones. Some aliasing can even be quite
acceptable on certain sounds with high noise content, such as drums and cymbals.

34

--- Page 38 ---

Adjusting Playback Parameters

Explaining how to use envelope generators is beyond the scope of this book.
They are just as important in creating useful sounds on the Mirage as they are ona
synthesizer. The Mirage envelope generators provide a great deal of flexibility through
modulation of the individual stages. Familiarize yourself with them thoroughly and you
will be able to take any old sample and turn it into a musically viable sound.

Before you sample, there is always some sound present in the Mirage, such as
the piano if you had just loaded Sound Disk #1. When you sample, the Program
parameters are not changed; they remain behind, even though the piano Wavesample
is gone. When you play your newly sampled sound, you will hear it with the piano
envelopes, the piano filter setting, whatever is set up in the current program. This may
not be what you had in mind! In particular, the envelope shapes and chorusing may be
changing the sound of your sample drastically. If the sound dies away, sounds too
muffled, or doesn't have a sharp attack, suspect the playback parameters. That is why
its usually best to load the “plain vanilla" sound from the MASOS disk (or a blank
Formatted disk) before sampling.

You can also use this feature to your advantage. As with a synthesizer, it's often
easier to modify an existing patch than to start from scratch. Before you sample, load in
a sound which has a Program similar to the sound you want. For example, if you are
sampling a french horn, you might want to try sampling into the trombone Program.
Consider what type of velocity feel you want, whether the filter should be kept high or
swept down, etc. Eventually you may want to save a sound which is specially
designed for the types of sounds you like to sample; a personal template. Load this
template in before you sample, and most of the work will already be done for you.
Also, remember that you can copy Programs from one sound to another, after you have
a wavesample you like.

35

--- Page 39 ---

EXAMPLE 2: SAMPLING A SYNTHESIZER OR GUITAR WITH A SHORT
LOOP

Sustaining simple sounds is a matter of looping on a single cycle of the input
waveform. The key to looping is to sample the right pitch at the right sample rate. The
Mirage can only sample at certain fixed rates, so we will need to tune our sound source
to meet the Mirage's demand (If an instrument is not tunable, it may be necessary to
record it on a variable speed tape recorder and tune the playback speed.).

The first instrument you try to loop should be one which is clearly pitched,
tunable, and has no vibrato. Guitar, bass guitar, organ, synthesizer, or other keyboard
instruments are all good choices. It is much more difficult to loop instruments where a
fallible human is involved in sustaining the pitch, such as woodwinds, bowed strings,
or voice, since the pitch isn't likely to remain constant throughout the sustain. If you
have a synthesizer, find an electric piano patch, or something else percussive with a
clear sustain. If it has a built in chorusing effect, turn it off. Chorusing will only make
looping more difficult and you can add the chorusing back later using detuning on the
Mirage.

In this example you will sample the note A, 110 Hz, an octave and a third below
middle C. This is the open A string on a guitar. The Mirage expects a specific pitch,

which, at the nearest available sample rate, happens to be slightly higher than a
perfectly tuned 'A’. For proper looping, retune the instrument to be sampled as follows:

1) Set [21] Master Tune to 55 (25 cents sharp). This will allow the A key on
the Mirage to be used as a pitch reference for retuning the guitar.

2) Load the Drums/Bass-Synth sound (lower sound #3) from ENSONIQ Sound
Diskette #1. This provides a clear tone as a tuning reference.

3) Tune the instrument to be sampled to the A on the Mirage Bass-Synth.
4) Load lower sound #1 (plain vanilla) from the MASOS disk.
The default tuning of the "plain vanilla" sound will cause unity playback to occur

on E in the middle of the lower keyboard. Since you'll be sampling an A, you should
change the wavesample relative tuning parameters as follows:

36

--- Page 40 ---

5) To tune lower wavesample #1:

- Select lower wavesample #1 ([26]= 1).
- Set [67] Coarse Tune to 4.
- Set [68] Fine Tune to 80.

This provides a tuning offset of a half octave (80 Hex=128 and Fine Tune
provides 256th octave steps, so 128/256ths of an octave is a half octave), the
difference between A and E. With this offset, the A you sample will play back as anA
on the A key, rather than the E key.

6) Turn [77] User Multisampling on. This will prevent the Mirage from changing
the tuning back to the default settings when you sample.

7) Set the sampling parameters as follows:

Parameter Value Meaning
[73] Sample Time Adjust 35 28.5 KHz sample rate
[74] Input Filter Freq 80 7KHz cutoff
[75] Line Level Input ON line level
[76] Sampling Threshold 10 trigger at +/- 10
[77] User Multisampling ON __ no defaults

The crucial parameter here is the Sample Time (sample rate). For sounds with
short loops, we must use the right sample rate so the waveform lines up with the loop
boundaries. If the waveform doesn't line up, the loop pitch and sound quality will not
match the input. The table in Appendix A gives the proper sample rates for all of the
equi-tempered scale pitches.

8) Do some trial samples to adjust the output level of your signal source and the
Sampling Threshold level [76].

9) Turn the Loop Switch [65] ON. This will provide a one page loop starting at
FE. You can sample a sound while leaving the loop switch ON, as long as the
Multisampling switch is also ON (the Loop Switch will automatically be turned OFF if
you sample with Multisampling OFF).

10) Take a sample of the open A string on a guitar, or the A a tenth below middle
C on a keyboard.

37

--- Page 41 ---

11) Correct the tuning of the sound source, as follows:

Play the low A on the Mirage keyboard. It should be the same pitch as the sound
you sampled. Listen for the point where it drops into the loop. This should be about
two seconds after the attack and it will probably not be the same pitch as the rest of the
note. If the sound seems to sustain forever, at the same pitch, then you're done! If,
instead, the sound drops off into silence, then perhaps you didn't hold the note long
enough; the Mirage is looping on the silence after the note. Most likely, when you get
to the loop there will be a small change in the pitch, and tone, of the sound. Think of
the loop portion as the "correct" pitch. If the first part of the sound is lower in pitch than
the loop, raise the pitch of your sound source. Likewise, if the first part is higher in
pitch than the loop, your source is too sharp. Tune it down.

— Attack——> <— Loop ——>

SOURCE TOO SHARP. Time— SOURCE TOO FLAT. Time—

Keep re-sampling and re-tuning until the pitch of the first part of the sound (the
part before the loop) matches up exactly with the pitch during the loop. It should
become a smooth transition, with no tonal change at the "splice".

12) Now that you're all tuned and set up, you may want to try to get the right
"performance". If you're sampling a guitar, try different playing styles: muted, plucked,
harmonics, etc. Save the ones you like on a spare disk; you can always erase them.

13) Once you have a sample you like, try different program settings: release
times, filter cutoff, chorusing, etc. The Program can make the difference between an
ordinary sample and a great sound. Remember to set Master Tune [21] back to 50
when you are finished to bring the Mirage back to concert pitch.

EXAMPLE 3: MULTISAMPLING A DRUM SET

One of the outstanding features of the Mirage is its multisampling flexibility. Up to
sixteen different wavesamples can be spread over the keyboard. As you increase the
number of active wavesamples, it gets harder to keep track of all the parameters.
Pencil and paper become necessary tools. To explore multisampling, it pays to plan
out the keyboard assignment and memory allocation ahead of time. In this example,
we'll go through splitting up the keyboard and assigning wavesamples to the keys, and
then splitting up the memory and allocating memory to each wavesample.

38

--- Page 42 ---

First, you must make some decisions about what you want to do. In this example,
we've decided that we want the drums on the upper keyboard, so that we can play a
bass sound along with them on the lower keyboard. There is a maximum of eight
wavesamples on the upper sound, and we'll use them all.

Drums are difficult to sample. Unless you have access to a recording studio and
a tireless precision drummer, don't try to sample live drums. It's much easier, for
learning purposes, to sample drums that have already been processed and recorded.
One good source is a digital drum machine--the best one you can get. If you are really
interested in recording your own unique drum sounds, get them on tape first, and
sample them from the tape. In this way, you can do numerous retakes and adjust or
process the sound to your liking.

Besides choosing what sounds you want, you must decide where you want them
to appear on the keyboard. There are several considerations here.

1) Playability - group the kick drum and snare together, since they will be played
the most; group the closed and open hi-hats together; etc.

2) Range - a kick drum doesn't usually transpose very well and you don't need
two octaves of it. On the other hand, tom-toms cover a wide range and transpose very
well.

3) Compatibility - certain drum machines may put out MIDI note information which
could drive the Mirage very nicely. This would allow the Mirage to be played from the
drum machine, with all of its features (quantizing, swing, etc.). If the format of the drum
machine isn't programmable your Mirage drum layout will have to conform. We'll
assume this isn't important at the moment.

After deciding what layout is suitable, make a diagram of the keyboard, and plan
out the locations and ranges of the different sounds. Then make a chart of the Top Key
[72] values for each wavesample.
ge 333435 36_ 37 383940 41 42 YS4N4S4E4T4B 49 505152539 SY 5556515859 60 fi——— KEY NUMBER

dT

Snare1

— WAVES AMPLE
NUMBER

Snare2 *", . °
39 Open Rack Toms
Hi-hat

--- Page 43 ---

Wavesample Sound Keys Topkey

1 Crash cymbal 32-33 (g-g#) 33
2 Kick drum 34-36 (a-b) 36
3 Snare 1 37-38 (c-c#) 38
4 Snare 2 39-43 (d-f#) 43
5 Closed Hi-hat 44-45 (g-g#) 45
6 Open Hi-hat 46-47 (a-ai#) 47
7 Toms 48-54 (b-f) 54
8 Rack Toms 55-61. (f#-c) 61

What we've done is give most of the sounds two keys for easy rolls, and grouped
them together so that you can play kick drum, snare and hi-hat with one hand. If you
slide your thumb over, you can hit the crash cymbal and the kick-drum at the same
time. The tom-toms have 15 keys, so you have 15 tuned drums at your fingertips. Note
that the key names (c,c#,etc.) have nothing to do with the "note" that each drum plays.
The tuning of each wavesample is independent.

Once you make up a map like this, you can read off the value of Top Key [72] for
each wavesample. To implement the plan, you just have to do some fingerwork.

Setting Up
1) Load upper sound #3 from your MASOS disk which has the “plain vanilla"
sound template for Multisampling with eight wavesamples.

2) Turn User Multisampling [77] on since we will be multisampling.

3) Select the upper sound using the 0/PROG key (be sure the display shows a
"U", you wouldn't want to spend all of your time setting things up only to find later that
you've set up the wrong half of the keyboard!).

4) Set up the Keyboard-Wavesample assignment. You will be setting which keys
are assigned to each wavesample according to the drum list. Do this, from left to right:

40

--- Page 44 ---

Wavesample Topkey

Select [26], setitto 1 then Select [72],  setitto 33
Select [26], setitto2 then Select [72],  setitto 36
Select [26], setitto3 then Select [72],  setitto 38
Select [26], setitto4 then Select [72], setitto 43
Select [26], setitto5 then Select [72], setitto 45
Select [26], setitto6 then Select [72],  setit to 47
Select [26], setitto7 then Select [72], setitto 54
Select [26], setitto8 then Select [72], setitto61

You can select wavesamples using either [26] or the MASOS Select Upper
Wavesample key (in which case [72] remains selected, making things easier).

5) Now we have our drum set organized on the keyboard, but we still haven't put
any sounds into memory. Since we have no way of knowing in advance exactly how
long each sound will be, we have to experiment. We can make some guesses, though.
The Crash Cymbal will take the most memory; it has both a long decay and high
frequency content. The Kick Drum and the Closed Hi-hat, on the other hand, will use
very little memory; they are short sounds. The other sounds, the Snares and Toms, fall
in the middle; they're about a quarter to a half second long.

As a first guess, we might divide memory up this way:

Wavesample Sound # of pages # of pages in Hex
1 crash cymbal 128 80
2 kick drum 8 08
3 snare 1 16 10
4 snare 2 32 20
5 hi-hat closed 8 08
6 hi-hat open 32 20
7 low toms 16 10
8 rack-toms _16_ 10.

Total 256 pages 100 pages Hex

We've juggled the space allowed for each sound so that they all fit in 64K (256
pages) of memory. Now we have to set up all the Wavesample Start [60] and
Wavesample End [61] parameters to put this format into effect. When deciding where
to put each wavesample, it's best to put the biggest samples in first, starting them on
nice round number boundaries. That is, try to start the largest wavesamples at 0 or 80;
then put the next largest at 40 or CO; then fit the smaller ones into leftover memory.
The process might go like this:

41

--- Page 45 ---

Start wavesample #1 (128 pages) at 0, which will take all the memory up to 80 (it
will end at 7F). Next put wavesample #4 (32 pages) at 80 and wavesample #6 (32
pages) at AO, since they're the next largest. Then, fill in the rest of the 16 page
wavesamples, #3, #7, and #8. The two 8 page wavesamples fill in the remaining
memory space. The most difficult part is getting used to the idea of round numbers in
Hex. This is rather difficult to explain; its a little easier to grasp in pictures.

———-.———————- MEMORY PAGES —————______——————————————_
ele) 80 AO co DO EO FO F8

sie 8G sen gigenie BE soy GAZ 987.9 8B.5
Snare: Open 'Snare? Tom ? Rack
2 Hi-hat 1

Crash

Hi-hat

Again, a little planning on paper can save time and confusion later. When all
eight wavesamples are being used, and they are not all the same size, its hard to
remember all of those parameters.

Note that it is not necessary for the wavesamples to be consecutive in memory;
wavesample #2 does not have to follow wavesample #1. It's also not necessary that
the wavesamples butt up against one another. If we decide to shorten the end of
wavesample #1 to less than 7F, we don't have to move the next wavesample (#4)
down to take up the space; let it start at 80 anyway.

6) The process of setting up these memory divisions is just like setting up the
keyboard assignment divisions. Go through each wavesample and set Wavesample
Start and Wavesample End. Start with #1:

Wavesample Wavesample Start Wavesample End

Select [26], setto 1; then select [60], setto00; then select [61], set to 7F
Select [26], set to 2; then select [60], setto FO; then select [61], set to F7
Select [26], set to 3; then select [60], set to CO; then select [61], set to CF
Select [26], setto 4; then select [60], set to 80; then select [61], set to 9F
Select [26], setto 5; then select [60], set to F8; then select [61], set to FF
Select [26], set to 6; then select [60], set to AO; then select [61], set to BF
Select [26], set to 7; then select [60], set to D0; then select [61], set to DF
Select [26], set to 8; then select [60], set toE0; then select [61], set to EF

Again, if you are using MASOS, you can select the desired wavesample directly.

42

--- Page 46 ---

7) The other parameters in the Program also need to be set up, but there's a
sneaky way to do that. Load the Drums/Synth-Bass (lower #3) from Sound Diskette #1
into the lower keyboard. We will copy lower Program 1 of that sound into Program 1 of
the upper keyboard since lower Program 1 is already set up with drum-like envelopes
on the filter and amplitude. The copy procedure is:

Select lower Program 1 with the 0/PROG key (if you have just loaded in the
sound, lower Program 1 will already be selected, but it can't hurt to check). Select [16]
Copy Program to Upper and press the 1 key. Finally, hit ENTER. This copies all
of the Program parameters (but not the wavesample parameters) from the lower drum
Program to our new sound. Should you be sampling sounds for which you can't find a
suitable Program to copy, use the MASOS (or blank diskette) Program settings. You
can go in and adjust the Program to your liking when you're finished sampling. Just
remember, all of the wavesamples will be processed through the same Program, so
keep it subtle or you may create undesirable effects on other sounds

Now, finally, we can get to the business of sampling the sounds. We need high
frequencies, so set the Sample Time [73] to 30 (a sample rate of 33KHz). Make sure
the Multisampling switch [77] is on and select wavesample #1, for the Crash Cymbal.
It really doesn't matter which one we start with; all will follow the same procedure.

Repeat for Each Wavesample

1) Select the desired wavesample ({26] or MASOS key) and press the
SAMPLE UPPER button.

2) Set up the level so that the top bar just faintly blinks on the attack of the sound.

3) Press ENTER and play the sound into the Mirage.

4) Using the previous chart, find the keys on the keyboard that play that sound.
Adjust the frequency of the wavesample until it plays back at the original pitch. Tune
by ear using [67] Relative Tuning Coarse and [68] Relative Tuning Fine

5) If the sound is ‘clipped’ or not loud enough, adjust the input level and sample it
again. If the attack of the sound is cut off, try lowering the threshold level.

6) Trim the end of the sound as necessary. If the sound has a period of silence
after it or noise which sounds more like frying bacon, then trim the end as follows:

43

--- Page 47 ---

First, save the sound on disk! The trimming process will permanently alter the
sound in memory. Always save a copy of your sound on disk so that you can retrieve it
later should your experiments go awry.

Second, move the Sample End parameter [61] a few pages lower. This will
have no effect until you...

Third, turn the Loop switch [65] on and then off again. This truncates the sound
to the new Wavesample End location.

Noise

MOVE
WAVESAMPLE
END
(Parameter [61]).

TURN LOOP
SWITCH ON
THEN OFF

(Parameter [65]).

t
Sample Start Sample End

44

--- Page 48 ---

Finally, evaluate the new end point by playing the sound. If there's still some
noise, try taking more off. you can do this by going back to the second step. If you cut
off too much, the sound will end abruptly (perhaps with a click) and you must reload the
untrimmed sound from disk. The trimmed version cannot be restored to its old length.
Keep trying different lengths.

Another alternative is to resample the sound with the new Wavesample End
pointer. This may be quicker, depending on the sound source you are using. You can
also find the end of the sound by moving the Wavesample Start to the point where you
hear the sound end. Next, set the Wavesample End to this value, return Wavesample
Start to its original value and turn the loop on and off. Moving Wavesample Start
doesn't trim the data, so you can zero-in without having to reload if you overshoot.

After Sampling

Adjust the Relative Filter Freq [70] and Amplitude [69] for each wavesample.
Once you have all eight sounds in the machine, you can fine tune them. For most of
the sounds, the filter should be set so high that it has no effect. This can be done by
setting the wavesample Relative Filter Freq [70] to a high number, like 99. Other
sounds, like the Toms, may need more filtering. Adjust the Program filter envelope to
suit the Tom-Toms; it won't affect the Cymbals if the Relative Filter Freq of the Cymbals
is high enough. The important thing is, adjust the filters so everything sounds good.
Don't assume that everything will sound best when cranked up all the way--that
doesn't usually work on a synthesizer and probably won't work on the Mirage.

The Wavesample Relative Amplitude is important for drums, since the sounds are
so different from one another. The Hi-hat, in particular, will need to have a lower
amplitude to fit in well with the rest of the drum set. Don't try to balance the levels when
you're sampling, you want to record the hottest level you can for optimum sound
quality. You can balance levels after sampling using the Relative Amplitude parameter.

63

RELATIVE
AMPLITUDE 31

(Parameter [69]).
0

Crash Kick Snare Snare Closed Open Low Rack
1 2 Hat Hat Tom Tom

A neat trick--If you are sampling a tunable drum machine, you can get the effect of
super-high sample rates by tuning the sound down from its normal pitch. For example,
tune the Hi-hat down an octave on the drum machine and sample it at 25KHz. After
adjusting the playback tuning to bring the sound back up to the original octave, when
you play the sound back, the frequency response will be as if it were sampled at
50KHz. This trick can also be used with sounds on a variable speed tape deck.

45

--- Page 49 ---

If you can't allocate enough memory to a Cymbal, it will sound funny if it abruptly
Cuts off. It is extremely difficult to loop a Cymbal (non-harmonic overtones and all that).
One solution is to perform a manual 'fade-out' during the sampling process; One hand
to play the sound and the other to turn down the volume. With some practice you can
get a smooth fade-out that sounds natural. Another solution is to make the amplitude
envelope decay to zero before the end of the sound, however, this may have an
undesired affect on the other sounds.

EXAMPLE 4: CROSS-FADE DIGITAL SYNTHESIS

In this example we'll go through some of the more esoteric capabilities of
MASOS. The Mirage is actually a flexible digital synthesizer since it can manipulate
waveforms to create new electronic sounds of its own.

There are MASOS commands to Copy, Fade in, Fade out, and Add waveforms.
By combining these operations we will create a wavesample which is the merging of
two different waveforms.

The basic process goes like this:

1) Select two waveforms of one page each. We'll call these Wave1 and Wave2.
Practically any page from any sound will do. They can be taken from a sound that you
already have on disk, or you can sample them just for this experiment. The operations
that we will perform will turn any waveform into a pitched sound. One choice might be
a very bright sound for Wave1 (for example a waveform from a saxophone
wavesample) and a more mellow, pure tone for Wave2. There is a pure sine tone on
Sound Diskette #1, on Program 4 of the wooden flute sound.

2) Load lower sound #1 from the MASOS disk. This will give you plain vanilla
envelopes and two wavesamples on the lower keyboard.

Wavesample #1 Wavesample #2
[60] Wavesample Start 00 7F
[61] Wavesample End 80 FF

3) Copy wave into lower page 00. Wave1 is whatever complex wave we would
like to use. We can pluck a page out of any upper sound by copying it to the lower.
Let's say that we would like page FE (Hex) from the saxophone sound on Sound
Diskette #3. Load the sound into the upper memory as usual. Make sure you are
currently in upper memory (use the 0/PROG key). Set [85] Source Start Page to
FE. Set [87] Source End Page to FE. Set [89] Destination Page to 00. Set [94]

46

--- Page 50 ---

Destination Memory Bank Select to LO (lower). Press the FUNCTION Key
(LOAD SEQ). Press the 1 key (for the Copy function) and ENTER.

4) Replicate Wave from 00 to 7F. A copy of wave is now in page 00 of the
lower memory. We will make every page, from 00 to 7F, exactly the same. Make sure
you are currently in lower memory. Set the Source Start [85] to 00. Set the Source
End [87] to 7F. Press the FUNCTION Key. Press the 8 key (for the Replicate
function) and ENTER.

5) Fade Out from 00 to 7F. All the Source pointers should still be in place, so just
execute the function. Press the FUNCTION Key, the 3 key (for Fade out) and
ENTER. The resulting waveform data will now fade out in level from full volume at 00
to silence at 7F.

6) Copy Wave2 into lower page 80. Wave2 will be the waveform that we will
merge into. For example, if we wish to use the sine wave on Sound Diskette #1, load
only upper sound 3, the wooden flutes. Upper Program 4, a vibes sound, uses
wavesample #3, a sine wave, which is at page 7E in memory. Follow the same
process as in step 3 above, but set the Source to page 7E, and the Destination page to
80 instead of 00. This will copy upper page 7E (the sine wave) to lower page 80.

7) Replicate Wave2 from 80 to FF. Make sure you are currently in lower memory.
Set the Source Start [85] to 80. Set the Source End [87] to FF. Press the
FUNCTION Key, the 8 key (for the Replicate function) and ENTER.

8) Fade in from 80 to FF. All the Source pointers should be still in place, so just
execute the function. Press the FUNCTION Key, the 2 key (for Fade in) and ENTER.
The resulting waveform data will now fade in from silence at 80 to full volume at FF.

9) Add the fade in waveform to the fade out waveform. The Source pointers will
already be set up properly, from page 80 to FF. Set the Destination page to 00, on the
lower memory. Press the FUNCTION Key, the 5 key (for Add) and ENTER.
Wavesample #1 will now contain the merged waveforms. Wave1 fades out as Wave2
fades in. In the middle, around page 40, they are evenly mixed together.

47

--- Page 51 ---

Using the MASOS functions, you can create an infinite variety of sounds, far more
complex than any synthesizer. It is possible to create unusual timbres that still retain
acoustic qualities. You can effectively layer sounds by adding them. You can reverse
sounds so they play backwards, add a backward sound to a forward sound, create
bi-directional loops to smooth loop transitions and you can process your final sound
through the analog synthesizer section. In short, the Mirage is not only a powerful
sampling keyboard, it is also an outstanding digital synthesizer and analog
synthesizer. Further uses of MASOS are described in the appendix.

48

--- Page 52 ---

PART IV - ADVANCED SAMPLING TECHNIQUES

This chapter starts with an explanation of the basic concepts used in sampling
systems, then it moves to the art of sampling; the tools, techniques, and tricks that can
be used to get the highest quality sounds into, and out of, the Mirage.

SAMPLING TERMS

The musician who is serious about sampling sounds will need to be familiar with
a few terms:

A Sample is one number representing the amplitude of a signal at one instant in
time. Most sounds will require thousands of samples to be accurately represented. In
the Mirage each sample is a byte. This means that it is an eight-bit number, having a
value from -127 to +127 (255 different values).

The Input Sample Rate is the frequency of the analog-to-digital conversion while
recording a sound.

The Output Sample Rate is the frequency of the digital-to-analog conversion
while playing back a sound.

Aliasing is distortion caused by sampling sounds with frequencies which are
greater than one half the input sample rate.

The Input Filter, or Anti-aliasing Filter, limits the high frequency content of the
sound being sampled to prevent aliasing. Its setting will depend on the input sample
rate.

In addition, we have invented the term Wavesample to mean a single sampled
sound, of variable size, with an associated group of 12 parameters which control
where the wavesample is in memory and how it should be played. Sixteen
wavesamples reside in the Mirage memory; 8 in lower memory and 8 in upper
memory. Often they are not all used, but they are always there.

SAMPLE RATE

Digital sampling is, on the simplest level, much like tape recording. As with tape
recording, the recording time must be traded off with recording fidelity. The highest
quality professional tape recorders run at fast speeds, such as 15 or 30 inches per
second. Cassette recorders go at the slow speed of 1-7/8 inches per second.

In sampling, we use digital memory instead of tape. The sample rate in a digital
system is like the tape speed. Higher rates can do a better job of reproducing higher
frequencies, but use up memory faster just as higher tape speed uses more tape.

49

--- Page 53 ---

Unfortunately memory is considerably more expensive than tape; we have to carefully
consider how we use it up. There is always a trade-off between bandwidth and sample
duration. At lower sample rates the sound can last longer; at higher rates it will be
shorter, but the frequency response will be increased.

In the Mirage, each half of the keyboard has 64K bytes of memory for its sound
recordings (that's 64 times 1024, or 65,536 bytes). At the default sample rate of 29.4
KHz, a sound will last 2.2 seconds. It's easy to compute:

65.536 samples = 2.2 seconds

29,400 samples per second

That means that we can record 2.2 seconds of sound at the default sample rate.
If we transpose that sound up one octave, by playing higher on the keyboard, the
sound will only play for 1.1 seconds. Going down an octave will make the sound play
for twice as long; down two octaves and it will be four times as long, or 8.8 seconds.

lf we wanted to record a sound that was 6 seconds long, we would start with a
different sample rate:

6 samp! = 10,922 samples per second
6 seconds (10.9 KHz)

We need a sample rate of 10.9 Khz to fit 6 seconds of sound in 64K of memory
(you would set the Sample Time to 91 psec). At this rate, the original sound will be 6
seconds long when we play it back at unity. Playing an octave lower, the sound lasts
for 12 seconds, and down two octaves stretches it to 24 seconds. Some New Wave
songs are shorter than that!

We see that we can change the sample rate to get different recording times in the
same amount of memory, but what happens to the frequency response as we do this?
The frequency response of a digital system is directly related to the sample rate. The
theoretical maximum frequency that can be sampled or played back is one-half the
sample rate. This is known as the Nyquist frequency.

As we transpose a sound by playing it on the keyboard, we are changing the
output sample rate, and thus changing the frequency response. For example, if we
sample a sound with a 10KHz sample rate, then it has (possible) spectral content up to
5KHz. Playing it back on the keyboard, we can transpose it up one octave by doubling
the playback sample rate. Now the output sample rate is 20KHz, and the Nyquist point
has moved up to 10KHz. As we transpose a sound, we transpose its spectrum with it.
Likewise, if we played the sound down one octave, the Nyquist frequency would be cut
in half; down to 2.5KHz. Go down two octaves and we've cut our frequency response
down to 1.25 KHz! When transposing up we could in theory, extend the frequency
response indefinitely. In practice, the Mirage imposes a 15KHz limit on the output,
even when transposing a sound up many octaves.

50

--- Page 54 ---

SAMPLED SPECTRUM
Nyquist Frequency Sample Rate

ie) 2.5 Khz S Khz 10 Khz 20 Khz

TRANSPOSED UP ONE OCTAVE Nyquist Fregueiiey Sarcihe Rate

(e) 2.5 Khz S Khz 10 Khz 20 Khz

TRANSPOSED DOWN ONE OCTAVE
Nyquist Frequency
i Sample Rate

Ad v

ie) 2.5 Khz 5S Khz 10 Khz 20 Khz

So there is a very simple tradeoff involved in choosing sample rates: sample
duration versus frequency response. Sounds with short loops, however, have special
requirements for very specific sample rates, as we shall see.

ALIASING

Aliasing is a kind of noise or distortion which can be generated by sampling. It is
perceived as a harshness or "rattyness" in a sound. On pure tones, it can sound like
odd, almost ring-modulated, undertones. An alias is created when the input sample
rate is not high enough to capture the highest frequencies in a sound. If any
frequencies above one half the sample rate are present in the input signal, they will
‘alias' when they are sampled. The input filter, correctly adjusted, prevents this by
removing the offending signals.

Aliasing is also called 'fold-over distortion’, a term which is a more descriptive of
how it occurs. Whenever any sound is sampled, the sampling process generates
many replicas of the sound in different frequency ranges. One of these replicas starts
at the sample frequency and goes downward in frequency. This is usually not a
problem as the output filter will remove anything above the Nyquist frequency. If,
however, the original spectrum had frequencies above one half the sample rate, these

51

--- Page 55 ---

will generate new frequencies below one half the sample rate. The higher the original
frequencies were, the lower the new frequencies will be. The high frequencies have
‘folded over' and invaded our signal, causing the roughness and noise in our sound.
We can't remove them with the output filter because they are actually lower in
frequency than the highest frequencies we want to reproduce. Bringing the filter down
to remove the alias tones would also filter out the desired signal! Aliasing is prevented
by eliminating these high frequencies before they are sampled.

Replicas of Signal
SAMPLED SPECTRUM [ |
Nyquist Frequency Sample Rate

0 15 Khz 30 Khz

Loutput Filter Passband—
INPUT FREQUENCIES HIGHER THAN 1/2 SAMPLE RATE
Nyquist Frequency Sample Rate

ie} 15 Khz 30 Khz

REPLICA SPECTRUM (ALIAS)
Sample Rate

[e) 15 Khz 30 Khz

COMBINED SIGNAL AND ALIAS

ey

Sample Rate

ie) 15 Khz 30 Khz

52

--- Page 56 ---

The Mirage uses a custom-designed VLS/ Integrated Circuit created by
ENSONIQ, called the Q-chip™. This chip contains the oscillators, mixers and DCAs
used in the Mirage. The Q-chip makes low-cost digital sampling possible. It does,
however, have certain idiosycracies which make it very easy to get very bad sounds if
you don't understand how things work.

All digital systems have to deal with aliasing. Input aliasing is caused by trying to
sample frequencies which are higher than half the sample rate. Input alias frequencies
become part of the signal; there is no way to get rid of them once they are there. They
are prevented by filtering the input so that those high frequencies never get sampled.
Output aliasing is always present; it is a replica of the signal spectrum, transposed up
higher than the Nyquist frequency. All digital systems have a sharp filter on the output
to eliminate any audible output aliasing. Most of the frequencies are above 15KHz,
which are inaudible, anyway.

Digital oscillators like those in the Q-Chip also produce a third kind of aliasing,
called a 'table-lookup alias'. This noise can be extremely troublesome when it shows
up in the audio spectrum. It is a function of the input sample rate, the input signal, the
output sample rate and the amount of transposition--that makes it rather hard to predict.
The ways to control it are fairly straightforward, however. The strength of the alias is
directly proportional to the ratio of the input frequency to the input sample rate,
therefore, using a higher input sample rate will always improve the signal-to-noise ratio
of a sound with strong high frequencies. The section on virtual sample rates shows
how to achieve the effect of high sample rates by using a variable speed tape recorder.

QUANTIZATION

Since a sample is a number representing a signal at a certain point in time, we
can ask how well it represents the signal at that point. In any digital system, the signal
is quantized; that is, there are only a discrete (limited) number of different levels that
the samples may assume. In the Mirage, samples can range from +127 to -127, or 255
different values. If the amplitude of the signal being sampled falls between two of the
available values, the Mirage chooses the nearest available value. The difference
between the actual value and the chosen value is called quantization error and it
exists in all digital systems. Normally quantization shouldn't concern the Mirage user,
but it's good to know what it is. The Mirage uses an 8-bit Floating-point system to
represent sounds. What this means is, there is an 8-bit sample and an 8-bit volume
which, when multiplied together, form a 16-bit result for each oscillator. The 16
oscillator outputs are added together to form the final output. This adds the equivalent
of another 4 bits of dynamic range. In theory, then, the Mirage has 20-bit dynamic
range, or 120 dB. Actually the Mirage will distort if you try to play 16 sine waves, at
maximum volume, all in phase, at the same time. Don't do that.

Quantization error results in noise which is most obvious when the signal
recorded in memory is at a low level. For exarnple, if a nice smooth sine wave were

53

--- Page 57 ---

sampled at too low a volume, the sample values might only go from +4 to -4. In
memory, the wave would look very stepped:

On playback, there would be a "fizzle" sound in the background. This happens
because there is not enough vertical (amplitude) resolution to accurately represent the
waveform. In normal, full-level recording, quantizing noise is also present, but it is 52
dB quieter than the signal, making it virtually inaudible.

The only time quantization noise may be a problem is on sounds with both quiet
and loud parts. The best solution is usually to use a compressor to even-out the signal,
and then use the envelope generators to put the dynamics back in on playback. This is
effective for getting the “fizz" out of the end of a drum sound, for example.

LOOPING

Finding good loops is one of the most difficult parts of sampling. Looping is not a
dirty word; every sampling instrument, even the $37,000 ones, use looping to sustain
notes. Looping takes advantage of the acoustic property of most musical sounds: after
a complex attack portion they settle down into a smooth, predictable sustain portion.

There are really only two useful types of loops: long loops and short loops. A
short loop is usually a loop on a single cycle of a waveform. This type of loop will
always have pure pitch, since the repetition is absolutely perfect. The harmonic
content of the waveform, no matter how complex it may be, is static over the duration of
the loop. To add motion to the sound we can use two oscillators slightly detuned, or
perhaps sweep the filter. This works remarkably well on most sounds which have very
clear pitch content. The Mirage defaults to a short loop.

The other type of loop, the long loop, is better for sounds which have more
dispersed pitch content. For example, a string section of 14 violins must use a loop
long enough to capture the vibrant chorusing of 14 different notes, since none of the
violins will be exactly in tune with each other. The longer the loop, the better.

Your ear is very sensitive to repeated patterns of 2 to 10 per second, since this is
the range of beats and tempos. Loops that repeat at that rate are rather annoying and
are very hard to hide. Loops of one second or more, however, are less noticable and
are easily masked by other activity in a musical piece. That's why there's no middle
ground; loops are either short or long. Of course, there are always exceptions.

54

--- Page 58 ---

< Short Loop
cert

Long Loops

Long loops are usually used with large wavesamples; those occupying all 64K or
perhaps 32K of memory. They are needed for sounds like strings and vocal chorus, in
which the sustain section is a rich texture rather than a pure pitch. In these cases you
would like the loop "splice" to be as subtle as possible. That means finding two points,
the Loop Start and Loop End, that are nearly identical in pitch, volume, and tonal
quality. Another use for long loops occurs with sounds which are actually “events”. For
example, a cuckoo clock might have a loop containing a single "cuckoo". In this type of
sound, the loop points are defined by the desired rhythm of repetition.

There are two steps to finding a long loop:
1) Find the general page location of the loop points.
2) Fine tune the loop end to eliminate clicks.

The general location of a loop is estimated first. The decision is based entirely on
the type of sound, and what you want to do with it. If you have sampled a measure of a
musical piece, and want it to loop in rhythm, then there isn't much choice. A_ typical
instrument sound is more difficult, since we would like the splice to be inaudible.
Suppose you have sampled a voice singing the word "blah". You would like to use a
long loop to retain the breathiness of the "ah” portion. Since we would really like the
loop to be as long as possible, begin by moving the Loop Start [62] all the way to the
beginning of the sound (so that it is the same as the Wavesample Start [60]), then turn
the loop on. Now start increasing the Loop Start value, moving the starting point
towards the end of the wavesample. As you move it, Keep replaying the sound and
listen to the result. We can expect there to be a click at the splice point in the loop, but
we are listening for changes in the tone (vowel). As we move the Loop Start away from
the start of the wavesample, the sound changes from:

55

--- Page 59 ---

blah-blah-blah-blah-blah
to

blah-lah-lah-lah-lah-lah
to

blah-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah-ah

Note that you must restrike the key each time to hear the change. What we are
looking for is the place where the initial consonants (the "bl") end and the vowel (the
"ah") begins. You can drive back and forth to find a place where the tone of the “ah" at
the beginning of the loop seems to match up with the tone at the end of the loop. There
will probably still be a click. This process will be similar for most other sounds; you
look for the part where the initial transients have died away and the "steady- state”
portion begins.

The second step is to adjust the Loop End Fine Adjust [64]. Start with the
assumption that there is some place in the current Loop End page where the waveform
will match up with the waveform at the beginning of the loop. That will be a good loop.
Explore different Loop Fine values while listening for the click (you can drive the Loop
End Fine back and torth while holding a key. You do not have to retrigger the note
each time you make a change, although you may hear some strange glitches while
moving the loop). You can develop an ear for when you are getting close to a good
match-up. A perfect loop, where the splice is inaudible, is rare. You must also try
playing the sound at different pitches; sometimes a loop will click on one pitch but not
on another.

End of Loop» : ¢Start of Loop End of Loop> ; «Start of Loop

. . a 3
CLICK" CAUSED BY . .
WAVEFORM DISCONTINUITY QUIET, “CLICK’-FREE SPLICE

It would be nice if you could always find a good loop, but sometimes there is no
loop point that works! Even systems with "auto-looping” can't find a good loop if none
exists. If you can't find a loop, its best to try again somewhere else. Usually you would
move the Loop End parameter down one page and start again. Sound tedious? It can
be! The Visual Editing System makes this all much easier by allowing you to see
the waveform on the computer screen. If you have no luck moving the Loop End, try a
different Loop Start and begin hunting for a loop again. If that doesn't help and you
can't find a good loop anywhere in the entire memory, you will have to resample the
sound and start all over. Good luck.

If you do have the Visual Editing System, you can look through the waveform
to find a good place to start the loop. There are several generally applicable criteria for

56

--- Page 60 ---

calling a spot "good". First of all, it should be a point in the waveform after all the initial
transients in the attack have died down. Second, it should be a zero crossing. This
means, on the page where the loop starts, the first few samples should have amplitude
values of zero or near zero (middle scale). Splicing at zero amplitude will help cover
up the splice, reducing clicks. Third, the start page should be a "round" number, if
possible. Page numbers ending in 0 or 8 are best; those ending in 4 or C will do; even
numbers are better than odd. All this has to do with some subtle internal workings of
the Q-Chip. Tiny pitch glitches can occur when the oscillators cross over certain
memory boundaries. If you can't find a desirable page that starts on a zero crossing,
you can try rotating the data until you line up a zero crossing with the page boundary.

Short Loops

Short loops are quite a different animal. The period of the loop becomes so short
that we can't pick out individual repeats. The repitition is so rapid that it becomes a
pitch. The cycling of the loop will become the pitch of our sound. With a short loop, a
sound has two very distinct parts: the attack portion and the loop portion. This "attack"
portion should not be confused with the attack segment of the envelope generator.
The attack portion of the sound is the part of the wavesample which is heard only once,
immediately before the loop. The pitch of the attack portion is determined by the sound
we sampled.

The pitch of the loop portion, however, is decided solely by the length of the loop.
You can prove this to yourself by sampling any old noise and turning on the default
loop, which is one page long. When the noise plays out and gets to the loop, suddenly
you will hear a constant pitch. The loop takes whatever data happens to be in that
page of memory, and turns it into a repeating waveform. The spectrum of that
waveform, the tone-color, probably has no resemblance to the original sound and the
pitch is most likely different from that of the attack.

ANY NOISE CAN BE A ‘WAVEFORM’!

Usually we would like a short loop to have a great resemblance to the original
sound! To do that we have to line up the length of the waveform with the length of the
loop. Most short loops are exactly one page long, therefore our task is to sample the

57

--- Page 61 ---

sound in such a way that each waveform cycle in the sound is exactly one page (256
samples) long. This means that our sample rate should be 256 times the frequency of
our sound source.

To achieve this relationship we can change either variable: the input sample rate
or the frequency (pitch) of our sound source. In some cases, we may need to change
both.

The main steps to getting a short loop are:

1) Choose a sample rate which corresponds to the pitch to be sampled. The
second sample rate chart in Appendix A gives the nearest sample rate to the
equi-tempered scale pitches. When you set one of these sample rates, the Mirage will
“expect” a certain, exact pitch for input.

2) Adjust the location of the loop, in pages, to the desired position in the sound
where the attack transients have died away and the timbre is relatively constant. The
default loop position, on the next to the last page, is often the best. Use a one page
loop whenever possible. Do not adjust Loop End Fine [64], leave it set at FF (very
nasty things can happen if you make the loop shorter than a page).

3) Fine tune the pitch of the source to match up to the pitch that the Mirage
“expects". This requires resampling and listening for a pitch change between the
attack sound and the loop, as we saw in the sampling examples.

This last step, fine tuning, is the most laborious. Note that the Mirage does not
"expect" the source to be in perfect, concert pitch. The Mirage has a limited number of
different sample rates, and each of these rates corresponds to some expected input
frequency; those frequencies don't quite line up with the notes that we call “in tune to
A440". For example, when the sample time is set to 35 (sec), the sample rate is
28,571 Hz. The pitch that the Mirage "expects" is 1/256 of this, or 111.6 Hz. True A
concert is 440, 220, or 110 Hz. Since we can't adjust the Mirage sample rate any
closer, we have to raise our sound source by 1.6 hertz. In that pitch range, a semitone
happens to be 6.5 hertz, so we're off concert pitch by about a quarter of a semitone, or
25 cents (that's 5 steps on the Mirage master tune control). You can retune the
wavesample after you have sampled the sound to get back to concert pitch.

Lengths of Short Loops

So far we have talked about short loops as single page loops. A single page
loop is one where the Loop Start is set to the same page as the Loop End, and the
Loop End Fine is set to FF. This means that the loop is exactly 256 samples long. For
certain sounds, particularly low-pitched sounds, you may need a longer loop, as one
waveform cycle may be more than 256 samples long. The Mirage will try, but do a bad
job, of playing short loops that are not exactly one, two, or four pages long (256, 512, or
1024 samples). The preferred loops are:

58

--- Page 62 ---

1) Loops of exactly one page (Loop Start=Loop End, Loop Fine = FF );

2) Loops of exactly two pages, where the first page is an even number (the page
number ends in 0,2,4,6,8,A,C, or E);

3) Loops of exactly four pages, where the first page number is divisible by 4
(page ends in 0,4,8, or C).

lf a short loop is not one of these cases, the Mirage will have some problems
playing it. Problems usually occur when the sound is played at higher pitches. These
evil loops may be detected by their ability to cause the display to temporarily blank out
completely when several keys are pressed--the Mirage is kept very busy trying to play
these loops. More keys or higher notes will cause the condition to deteriorate, until the
Mirage decides that enough is enough, and turns the notes off. These loops will also
go out of tune as they go up in pitch, and the pitch, in general, will be less accurate.

The bad loops to be avoided are:

1) Any loop less than 8 pages with a loop end fine adjustment other than FF.
2) Any 2 page loop that starts on an odd numbered page.

3) Any loop of 3, 5, 6, or 7 pages.

In short: do not use Loop Fine Adjust [64] on short loops (leave it at FF) and start
all loops on even boundaries in memory.

Sampling A Harmonic of the Loop Frequency

A single page loop is the smallest useful loop on the Mirage. At its highest
sample rate, the Mirage "expects" a fairly low note, the C below middle C. To sample
middle C, an octave above, we can use the same sample rate but an interesting thing
happens. Two complete waveform cycles will fit into a page of memory (each
waveform will be 128 samples long). Now when we loop, we are repeating those two
waveforms. Similarily, if we sample a note two octaves above the 'expected' pitch, we
are putting four waveforms into each page of memory.

In practice, this means that when you sample high frequencies, there will be
subharmonics in a short loop unless the source is exactly lined up with the sample
rate. This is caused by any differences in the waveform cycles that will repeat at the
loop rate (which may be many octaves below the frequency of the signal).

Occasionally you may encounter a waveform, like the piano, which has subtle

phase variations from one waveform cycle to the next. This is caused by the fact that
there are really three strings vibrating on a piano note. Finding a ‘multiple

59

--- Page 63 ---

wave-per-page' loop may be impossible. Even two waveforms, right next to each other
on one page, can be different enough to cause a subharmonic when looped. You
must force the waveforms to be identical by making the second one an exact copy of
the first. Use the Copy function of MASOS, which can copy any size chunk of memory.
Set the Source to be the first half of the page: XX00 to XX7F (Hex). Set the Destination
to be the second half of the same page: XX80 to XXFF (Hex).

The same procedure (which is identical to waveform replication on boundaries
less than a page) can be performed on smaller waveforms, such as waveforms that are
64 samples long (4 waveforms/page). Best results occur if you stick to an even number
of waveform cycles in a page (don't try to fit 3 waveforms in a page, it won't work as
well, even if it seems like it should). Of course, the more waveforms you cram into a
page, the less samples for each waveform can be stored, which can lead to distortion.

peoee One Page ss:

Fen Fenn Each half must be identical.
ONE CYCLE IN ONE PAGE: TWO CYCLES IN ONE PAGE:
THE FUND AMENT AL THE SECOND HARMONIC

SAMPLING TECHNIQUES
Virtual Sample Rates

There are two ways to get the effect of a higher input sample rate. One is,
obviously, to increase the sample rate. The other is to transpose the input down in
frequency; lowering the pitch of the source. The effect is the same: There are more
samples taken for each waveform cycle. This gives a better 'picture'’ of the signal.

Certain electronic sounds, like synthesizer oscillators, can be transposed (by
retuning) and still retain exactly the same harmonic content. Most acoustic
instruments, however, have markedly different harmonic content when played at
different pitches. A multi-speed tape recorder is needed to electronically slow the
sound down while maintaining the same relative harmonic content.

Using a Tape Recorder
A variable-speed, or at least a two-speed, tape recorder is an invaluable tool for
the advanced sampler. By recording at 7-1/2 ips, for example, and playing back at

3-3/4 ips, we transpose a sound down one octave. Sampling this signal at 25KHz will
give the same result as if we sampled the original sound at 50KHz.

60

--- Page 64 ---

Another reason for having a variable-speed tape recorder is for pitch adjustment.
Any sound which uses a short loop must be sampled at a rate which is exactly 64, 128,
256 or 512 times the fundamental pitch. This will result in waveforms which are exactly
64, 128, 256 or 512 samples long. The Mirage does not have a ‘fine tune’ on the input
sample rate; only certain rates are available. You must therefore tune your sound to
one of the pitches the Mirage will accept. See the section on short loops (page 57) for
more on this.

A third reason for using a tape recorder while sampling is repeatability. No
matter how expert a flutist may be, one could never play the same note the same way
twice. If you are trying to get a looped sound, the exact frequency of the source is
critical. There is nothing you can do to a wavesample, once it is in the machine, to fix
an incorrect source frequency to sample rate ratio. In acoustic instruments, especially
wind instruments,tiny pitch fluctuations occur constantly and the sound may be in tune
on the 20th cycle of the waveform, then drift out of tune by the 40th. With a taped
sound you can deal with the detail of the sound because it is exactly the same each
time you play the tape.

Sample Rate Fine Tuning

Suppose you wish to sample the low C on a gigantic pipe organ. The organ was
tuned to concert pitch, so the low C is 32.703 Hz, a very low note indeed. To sample
that note at 512 times the fundamental will require a sample rate of:

32.703 Hz * 512 = 16,744 Hz
(cycles per second) (samples percycle) (samples per second)

That's all well and good, but when we go to our Mirage sample rate chart we find
that the nearest available sample rate is 16666.6 Hz; not close enough for a good
clean loop. One solution is to tune the organ pipes to the "expected" frequency, which
is:

16.666.6 samples per second = 32.552 cycles per second

512 samples per cycle

Now if you are too lazy, or for some other reason don't wish to retune a pipe
organ, you could, instead, use a vari-speed tape recorder. Anything that has
plus-or-minus a semitone of pitch control will do. Record the organ note with the pitch
control at center. Move the pitch control down when playing back, making the sound
ever so slightly flat. The rest is trial and error, based on listening to the sampled sound
with the loop turned on; retuning the tape until the attack is in tune with the loop.

61

--- Page 65 ---

Equalization

Sampling is more similar to recording than to synthesis. The skills and
techniques used by recording engineers are just as important in achieving a good
sample as they are in achieving a good sounding record. At first you may think that if
you put a microphone in a room with a piano and sample middle C, you will have an
accurate piano sound for the Mirage. In fact, there is no one "true" piano sound, and
recording engineers still argue over the best places to put which microphones to get
the "best" sound. To make things worse, a “true” piano sound on one particular note
doesn't sound as good when transposed up or down; things like “action noise" or
"frame noise" cause problems; and all the high strings ring when you hit one note.

The moral is: to get a "true" sound out, you don't (necessarily) put a true sound in.

Recording engineers are used to adding equalization to sounds to help them
work in a musical way. Many sounds need to be exaggerated or distorted in some way
so they sound right when mixed in with other sounds. A kick bass drum is often
equalized on records to bring out the "kick" part of it: a boost at 4KHz. It doesn't sound
like a drum anymore, but it sounds good in the context of the music. In any case, the
same creative approach must be used when sampling sounds. In this case sounding
good "in context" means “when a sound is played on the Mirage keyboard".
Equalization can greatly enhance a sound by bringing out the essence of its character
and by suppressing noises which, although they exist in the real instrument, don't work
for a digitally sampled imitation of it (for example, action noise in a piano is part of the
sound, but, in a real piano the action noise is constant. If you transpose a piano
sample which contains action noise, the noise will transpose in pitch as well,
producing a strange thump that tracks the pitch of the note).

Equalization is achieved by putting an equalizer between the signal source and
the Mirage sampling input. The settings for the EQ must be derived experimentally.
Here's a convenient way to do sample equalization:

1) Sample your sound flat, with no EQ.

2) Get most of the Mirage parameters set up the way you expect to use them.

3) Put an equalizer, preferrably parametric, on the Mirage output.

4) Play the key on the Mirage that plays the sound back at the pitch it was
sampled. Adjust the equalizer while playing the key to get closer to the sound you
would like. Boost the highs, take out some midrange, notch out a nasty harmonic;

whatever.

5) Remove the equalizer from the Mirage output and put it on the input; between
the sound source and the Mirage.

62

--- Page 66 ---

6) Resample the sound. It will now have the desired EQ ‘built-in’ to it.

One of the difficult aspects of multi-sampling is matching up the different samples
across the keyboard. Equalization can help smooth out the differences between
adjacent samples.

Another use of equalization is to help out the input anti- aliasing filter. If you have
a sharp low pass filter available, you can increase your effective bandwidth by using
two filters at a higher frequency instead of the single internal input filter. The additional
filter increases the roll-off slope at the input, allowing the same attentuation of high
frequencies at a higher cutoff frequency than is possible with the lesser slope.

In addition, the Mirage is not a “flat” reproduction system. There is a filter on the
input, and a filter on the output. Both filters must usually intrude on the signal's high
frequency components somewhat. If this is a problem, the solution is to “pre-
emphasize” the signal before sampling, much as tape decks and other signal
processing equipment do.

Dynamic Filtering

Dynamic input filtering can be useful for certain sounds. This means changing
the external filter setting during the course of the sample, either by hand or
automatically. For example, If you want to let the bright attack of a plucked string
through, but want to loop on a more mellow waveform, you can manually sweep the
EQ during sampling so the sound loses its high frequencies faster than it would
normally.

Dynamic output filtering is created with the Mirage filter envelope. You can
simulating the natural muting of tone quality as a sound decays even if you're looping
on a "bright" waveform. You can create the acoustic effect of increasing brightness with
increasing key velocity (provided, of course, the sound is bright to begin with, the filter
can't add brightness, only remove it). In some cases you can use the filter as a "noise
gate" to hide quantizing noise as a signal dies away. Don't be afraid to use to filter to
achieve the desired sound--in most cases the best sound will not be achieved with the
filter “wide open". In all cases, any sound above half the sample rate can only be noise
and should be filtered out.

Volume Dynamics

The Mirage amplitude envelope performs different functions for different kinds of
sounds. In the piano, for example, the envelope attack is instantaneous and the
duration of the sound occurs in the decay stage of the envelope. An actual piano
envelope is more complex than that, particularly in the first second of a note. In the
Mirage, the wavesample itself reproduces the complex attack, then starts to die away.

63

--- Page 67 ---

When the wavesample hits the loop, its amplitude becomes fixed, and the envelope
generator takes over to finish the sound. The envelope generator creates the smooth
decay to silence. In a drum sound, on the other hand, the decay is part of the
wavesample, the envelope does little more than turn the sound on and off. Using the
envelope generator it is possible to create sounds which occur only while the key is
held, or which continue on long after a key is released. The sound itself will determine
how the envelope should be used. In most cases it is desirable to loop on a high
amplitude portion of the wavesample to insure good signal-to-noise. In these cases,
the envelope generator must be used to make the sound decay to silence.

Typically, it is a combination of the envelope generator and the dynamics within
the wavesample which contribute to a realistic sound. Careful use of the envelope
generator can give a better signal-to-noise ratio to a sound. For example, if you
wanted to create the sound of a crowd cheering, you may want it to swell slowly. One
approach is to sample a crowd sound as it begins to swell. The beginning of that
sample will be at a low level and some quantization noise could be audible. A better
approach is to sample the crowd at full tilt; maximum level for the whole sample. You
can then synthesize the swell of the crowd by increasing the attack time of the
envelope generator. You can even make the attack time velocity sensitive. This
approach gives you both a better signal-to-noise ratio and a longer portion of sound to
loop on. Use the envelope to model the contour of the sound.

TRUE PIANO ENVELOPE

TAmplitude

OUTPUT OF OSCILLATOR Sli

Loop Amplitude is Constant

MIRAGE ENVELOPE GENERATOR Time>

TAmplitude

: Times
COMBINED EFFECT OF SAMPLE AMPLITUDE AND

SUPERIMPOSED MIRAGE ENVELOPE
TAmplitude i

Time

64

--- Page 68 ---

A compressor or a peak limiter will automatically compensate for changing levels
in a signal. You can use one to effectively eliminate any envelope from the sound you
are sampling making it easier to loop (rapid fluctuations in amplitude are almost as
noticable as pitch fluctuations). The envelope generator can then be used to recreate
the shape of the sound. This is not always realistic, since the envelope generator may
not reproduce all the subtle fluctuations that the compressor took out.

SAMPLE DATA FORMAT

If you are using a computer to look at the Mirage waveforms, you may be
interested in the data format. Inside the Mirage, each sample is represented by a byte.
The value 80 (Hex) corresponds to a zero 'DC level’ in the waveform; it is mid- scale.
The amplitude can go from a level of +127 (FF Hex) to a level of -127 (01 Hex). The
value 00 has a special function: it acts as a marker which tells the oscillators where to
stop. If the loop is on, 16 zeros are inserted into the wavesample memory immediately
following the loop. Otherwise the 16 zeros are put at the very end of the wavesample
data. This is why loops cannot extend to the last byte of the last page of a
wavesample. Normally, you should turn the loop off before transferring data from the
Mirage to the computer as you will end up with undesirable zeroes in your data.

QUICK ADVICE

If you can't hear a particular wavesample and don't know why: The wavesample
may be hidden by another--check Top Key. Mix-mode or Initial Wavesample may be
affecting the key assignment too. Wavesample Relative Amplitude may be too low, or
at zero. Some evil sorcerer may have set the wavesample Max Filter Freq parameter
to some low number.

Turn off all loops before starting a multi-sample. One quick way to do this is by
sampling with the user Multisampling switch off. This effectively "cleans out" all of the
wavesamples and resets them (for upper or lower).

To trim the end of a non-looped sound, it is necessary to turn the loop on and off
once after moving the Wavesample End parameter.

Short loops should be exactly one page long whenever possible. Avoid using
Loop End Fine on short loops. Try to start loops on even page boundaries.

Start Wavesamples on large boundaries in memory. It's better to start a sound at
80 than at 81 or 82.

Use the line input setting for sampling, since the microphone input has a
compressor built in. You can always add external compression, but you can't remove
the effect of the internal compressor if you use it.

65

--- Page 69 ---

DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING

Once a sound has been sampled, there are many techniques for manipulating it,
which can be lumped under the label of digital signal processing. These include
simple operations like moving samples from here to there, or sophisticated processes
like digital filtering. MASOS includes a small set of operations which are very useful
for sampling and creating loops. This section will discuss those and some other
processing techniques which are not available in the Mirage, but which could be
implemented in an external computer.

Time Domain Manipulations

The simplest thing we can do with samples is to move them around in memory.
We can treat our sampled sound as a string of data, without knowing mucn about
where it came from. The basic operations we need are provided by MASOS. They are:

Copy - copy samples from one section of memory to another. Used for making
copies or back-ups of waveform data. Also good for making multiple identical
waveforms in a single page, as explained in the section on Short Loops (page 60).

Rotate - shift the samples up or down in memory, but keep all the data. Take the
samples which fall out one end and insert them in the other end. Rotate left to get rid of
silence or noise at the beginning of a wavesample. Rotate data to line up loop points
with zero crossings in waveform data.

Fade in - multiply the sound by a ramp going from zero to one. Create a fade-in,
or one part of a cross-fade.

66

--- Page 70 ---

Fade out - multiply the sound by a ramp going from one to zero. Fade out
non-looped sounds (such as orchestra hits) or create one part of a cross fade.

Ramp scaling - multiply each sample by the corresponding point on a linear
ramp, causing a gradual change from one volume to another. A general fading
function used to create non-linear fades by combining many waveform sections with
different fade ramps. When the ramp Scale Start and End Factors are equal, the
sound is attentuated by a fixed amount. Also used to balance the volume of the
beginning and end of a loop.

Add - add two sounds together, sample by sample. This is the equivalent of
mixing two sounds at equal volumes.

Invert - reverse the sign (polarity) of each sample. Positive numbers become
negative numbers, and vice versa. Can be used to splice a waveform with a Reversed
copy of itself, allowing bidirectional looping.

67

--- Page 71 ---

Reverse - reverse the order of the samples. Plays a sound backwards or can be
used to create bidirectional loops.

Replicate - make repeated copies of the same waveform. Eliminate
subharmonics in loops by making all pages the same.

By combining these basic operations, you can achieve various other
manipulations. For example:

Cross fade - fade from one sound into another. This is accomplished by adding
one sound which fades out to another which fades in.

Waveform merging - create blends of two waveforms. Replicate each waveform
seperately and perform across fade between the resultant wavesamples.

Amplification - a waveform can be increased in level by adding it to itself. For
smaller amplifications, add it to a scaled copy of itself.

Envelope correction - correct for differences in level between loop start and loop
end points. Arbitrary level control can be achieved by stringing together many small
scaling ramps.

Bidirectional looping - the first half of a loop can be copied, reversed and inverted
so the splice points at both ends line up perfectly.

Frequency Domain Manipulations

Since we usually think of music in terms of frequency, it makes sense to be able
to deal with sampled signals as frequencies. Unfortunately, most of the operations are
an order of magnitude more complex than waveform manipulations and require more

sophisticated software than is provided with MASOS.

Envelope detection - In the analog world, this is usually accomplished by
rectifying a signal and passing it through a low-pass filter to separate the envelope

68

--- Page 72 ---

from the signal. A simulation of this effect can be performed on the digital data. The
resulting function can be used to modify the original signal, as in a compressor,
expander, or limiter. It can be used, for example, to remove the decay of a piano note
so the loop end is the same volume as the loop start.

Sample Rate Conversion - Data that has been sampled at one rate can be
converted to another. For example, the data from a digital recorder is sampled at
around 44 KHz. This data could be used in the Mirage, but for looping purposes, you
may need to convert the data so the sample rate is a multiple of the pitch. When
converting, new samples are created by interpolating between the original samples.

Digital filtering - You can impose an arbitrary filter response onto a sampled
sound. This is useful for removing high harmonics which are below Nyquist, but
causing a problem with playback aliasing. Also, a high-pass response is sometimes
helpful for removing sub-audio frequencies which may become audible when
transposed up.

Analysis and resynthesis - Fourier analysis breaks up a complex waveform into
its component harmonics. It makes the assumption that the waveform is periodic,
which it often is not. When used with the reverse process, Fourier synthesis, it provides
a way of cleaning up loop waveforms. Even more sophisticated analysis tools have
been developed, such as the Phase Vocoder, which can analyze arbitrary harmonic
content and break it into sine waves with complex frequency and amplitude envelopes.
Most of this work has been done at Stanford with large computers, but it should be
possible on a micro, just slower.

Software synthesis - Many techniques have been developed to create sound
waves algorithmically: Additive Synthesis, Frequency Modulation (FM), non-linear
waveshaping, etc. All of these techniques can be employed to create sounds which
can be used as wavesamples in the Mirage.

In short, the Mirage is one of the most flexible electronic music systems ever
created. Since the Mirage is a general-purpose digital data player it has the ability to
reproduce any sound via sampling. It can also create the sound of analog
synthesizers, both by sampling and by processing with the internal synthesizer section.
The Mirage can also create the sounds of digital synthesizers, both by sampling and by
the algorithmic generation of digital waveforms. Complete access, via an external
computer, to the digital data used in creating sounds provides a degree of creative
freedom never before available to the average musician. ENSONIQ is committed to
developing and enhancing the Mirage system into the most powerful and affordable
digital music system ever offered--stay tuned for further developments!

69

--- Page 73 ---

Sample Time [73] Sample Rate

APPENDIX A - TABLES

MIRAGE SAMPLE RATES

50000.00
47619.05
45454.55
43478.26
41666.67
40000.00
38461.54
37037 .04
35714.29
34482.76

33333.33
32258.07
31250.00
30303.03
29411.77
28571.43
27777.78
27027.03
26315.79
25641 .03

25000.00
24390.25
23809.52
23255.82
22727.27
22222.22
21739.13
21276.60
20833.33
20408.16

Nyquist Rate

25000.00
23809.52
22727.27
21739.13
20833.33
20000.00
19230.77
18518.52
17857.14
17241 .38

16666.67
16129.03
15625.00
15151.52
14705.88
14285.71
13888.89
13513.51
13157.90
12820.51

12500.00
12195.12
11904.76
11627.91
11363.64
111411.11
10869.57
10638.30
10416.67
10204.08

70

Sample Rate/256

195.31
186.01
177.56
169.84
162.76
156.25
150.24
144.68
139.51
134.70

130.21
126.01
122.07
118.37
114.89
111.61
108.51
105.57
102.80
100.16

97.66
95.27
93.01

--- Page 74 ---

Sample Time [73] Sample Rate

MIRAGE SAMPLE RATES

20000.00
19607.84
19230.77
18867.92
18518.52
18181.82
17857.14
17543.86
17241 .38
16949.15

16666.67
16393.44
16129.03
15873.02
15625.00
15384.62
15151.52
14925.37
14705.88
14492.75

14285.71
14084.51
13888.89
13698.63
13513.51
13333.33
13157.90
12987.01
12820.51
12658.23

Nyquist Rate

10000.00
9803.92
9615.39
9433.96
9259.26
9090.91
8928.57
8771.93
8620.69
8474.58

8333.33
8196.72
8064.52
7936.51
7812.50
7692.31
7575.76
7462.69
7352.94
7246.38

7142.86
7042.25
6944.44
6849.32
6756.76
6666.67
6578.95
6493.51
6410.26
6329.11

71

Sample Rate/256

78.13
76.59
75.12
73.70
72.34
71.02
69.75
68.53
67.35
66.21

--- Page 75 ---

MIRAGE SAMPLE RATES

Sample Time [73] Sample Rate Nyquist Rate Sample Rate/256

80 12500.00 6250.00 48.83
81 12345.68 6172.84 48.23
82 12195.12 6097.56 47.64
83 12048.19 6024.10 47.06
84 11904.76 5952.38 46.50
85 11764.71 5882.35 45.96
86 11627.91 5813.95 45.42
87 11494.25 5747.13 44.90
88 11363.64 5681.82 44.39
89 11235.96 5617.98 43.89
90 11111.11 5555.56 43.40
91 10989.01 5494.51 42.93
92 10869.57 5434.78 42.46
93 10752.69 5376.34 42.00
94 10638.30 5319.15 41.56
95 10526.32 5263.16 41.12
96 10416.67 5208.33 40.69
97 10309.28 5154.64 40.27
98 10204.08 5102.04 39.86
99 10101.01 5050.51 39.46

Note: Sample Time settings below 30 are only available with the
optional Input Sampling Filter Cartridge.

72

--- Page 76 ---

SAMPLE RATES FOR EQUI-TEMPERED PITCHES

Note Name Freq EFreg*i28 Sample Time Sample Rate Nyquist

a 110 14080 71 14084 7042

b flat 117 14917 67 14925 7462

b 123 15804 63 15873 7936

Cc 131 16744 60 16666 8333

c sharp 139 17739 56 17857 8928

d 147 18794 53 18867 9433

e flat 156 19912 50 20000 10000
e 165 21096 47 21276 10638
f 175 22350 45 22222 11144
f sharp 185 23679 42 23809 11904
g 196 25087 40 25000 12500
g sharp 208 26579 38 26315 13157
a 220 28160 35 28571 14285
b flat 233 29834 34 29411 14705
b 247 31608 32 31250 15625
Cc 262 33488 30 33333 16666
c sharp 277 35479 28 35714 17857
d 294 37589 27 37037 18518
e flat 311 39824 25 40000 20000
e 330 42191 24 41666 20833
f 349 44700 22 45454 22727
f sharp 370 47358 21 47619 23809
g 392 50174 20 50000 25000

73

--- Page 77 ---

INTERNAL INPUT FILTER CUTOFF FREQUENCY

Setting [74] Frequency (in Hz)

50 1250
51 1324
52 1403
53 1487
54 1575
55 1669
56 1768
57 1873
58 1984
59 2102
60 2227
61 2360
62 2500
63 2649
64 2806
65 2973
66 3150
67 3337
68 3536
69 3746
70 3969
71 4204
72 4454
73 4719
74 5000
75 5297
76 5612
77 5946
78 6300
79 6674

74

--- Page 78 ---

INTERNAL INPUT FILTER CUTOFF FREQUENCY

Setting [74] Frequency (in Hz)

80 7071
81 7492
82 7937
83 8409
84 8909
85 9439
86 10000
87 10595
88 11225
89 11892
90 12599
91 13348
92 14142
93 14983
94 15874
95 16818
96 17818
97 18878
98 20000
99 21189

75

--- Page 79 ---

EXTERNAL FILTER CUTOFF FREQUENCY

Setting [93] Frequency (in KHz)

0 Off - uses internal filter
1 3.37
2 3.47
3 3.57
4 3.68
5 3.79
6 3.91
7 4.03
8 4.17
9 4.31
10 4.46
14 4.63
12 4.81
13 5.00
14 5.21
15 5.43
16 5.68
17 6.25
18 6.94
19 7.81
20 8.33
21 8.93
22 10.4
23 12.5
24 13.9
25 20.8

76

--- Page 80 ---

APPENDIX B - MIRAGE ADVANCED SAMPLING
OPERATING SYSTEM (MASOS)

MASOS

The two diskettes supplied with this book contain the Mirage Advanced Sampling
Operating System (MASOS). MASOS is an alternative to the standard Mirage
Operating System which is provided on all Mirage Sound Diskettes and Mirage
Formatted Diskettes. MASOS provides special functions which are useful to anyone
sampling sounds. The Sequencer will not operate while using MASOS as the
additional MASOS functions replace the Sequencer functions. The upper and lower
sounds on the MASOS disk are sound “templates” which should be used when
sampling your own sounds. They provide simple envelopes with velocity control and
remove all modulation and effects to minimize confusion.

BOOTING MASOS

To use MASOS, the MASOS diskette must be the first diskette inserted into the
Mirage after turning it on. The Mirage will load MASOS, then load the first sound on
the MASOS diskette. After booting, you may load any sound into the Mirage from
another diskette.

COMPATABILITY

MASOS provides all of the functions of the standard Mirage Operating System
except the Sequencer. You may load and save sounds, change parameters, sample
sounds and play the keyboard. Any sounds created or saved while using MASOS are
completely compatible with standard Mirage sounds. MASOS can load or save
sounds from any Mirage diskette.

When creating sounds with MASOS and saving to other non-MASOS disks,
never save ihe configuration parameters [14]. The configuration parameters of the
MASOS disk have a different format and saving the MASOS configuration on a
standard disk (or vice versa) will produce unpredictable results.

FEATURES

MASOS provides three key features. First, it contains new commands for
manipulating sound sample data. Second, the expanded MIDI interface supports the
optional Apple lle*-based Visual Editing System. Third, higher input sample rates
are possible when used with the optional Input Sampling Filter Cartridge.

77

--- Page 81 ---

The following section lists the new command parameters which are used in
MASOS. Refer to Chapter Il - Mirage Parameters for more information about how
to use these new functions.

New Front Panel Key Functions

Since the Sequencer is not available when using MASOS, the keys in the SEQ
section of the front panel are assigned new functions for convenience.

Upper Wavesample Select Key (REC SEQ)
Lower Wavesample Select Key (PLAY SEQ)

Pressing either of these keys will select the corresponding Mirage memory bank
(upper or lower) and display the current wavesample number as a flashing digit. If no
change is required, press the CANCEL key. If you wish to select a new wavesample,
press the number key (1 through 8) which corresponds to wavesample number you
wish to select.

MASOS Function Key (LOAD SEQ)

When this key is pressed, the flashing "Fn" or Function select prompt appears.
Pressing the number key associated with the desired function will result in a flashing
prompt for that function. If you wish to execute the function, press the ENTER key. If
you wish to abort the function, press the CANCEL key.

System Reset Command (LOAD ALL 0)

Performing a "Load All 0" (LOAD UPPER, LOAD LOWER, 0, ENTER) will
reboot the system from whatever diskette is in the drive, without requiring you to turn off
the power. Pressing the CANCEL key prior to ENTER will abort the reset. The
contents of the sound memory will be lost and replaced with Sound 1 from the disk that
is in the drive when the reset is initiated. This command is used to switch to the
standard Mirage Operating System after using MASOS without turning off the power.

Caution: this command will erase the current contents of the memory! Be sure to
save any sounds you want to keep before initiating this command.

The System Reset Command (LOAD ALL 0) is also available with the Standard
Mirage Operating System on diskettes with version numbers higher than 1.7.

78

--- Page 82 ---

New Command Parameters

Caution: these commands will alter the current contents of the memory! Be sure
to save any sounds you want to keep before initiating any of these commands.

[17] Copy Current Wavesample to Lower Wavsample (n)
[18] Copy Current Wavesample to Upper Wavsample (n)

After the display shows "U" or "L" and a flashing number, press the number key
for the wavesample which the current wavesample is to be copied into. Press the
ENTER key to execute the copy. The parameter number will appear after copying is
complete.

[19] Rotate Current Wavesample Data Left by (n) Locations
[20] Rotate Current Wavesample Data Right by (n) Locations

The display will flash "rL" or "rr" for a moment to indicate the direction of rotation,
then the number of locations of the previous rotate will appear. This value can be
changed using the up and down arrow keys. When the correct value is reached, press
ENTER to initiate the rotate function. The display will go blank briefly and then show
"dr" indicating that the data has been rotated.

[93] External Input Filter Frequency

This parameter has been added for use with the optional Input Sampling
Filter. The value of this parameter determines the cutoff frequency of the 7th-order
input filter according to the values listed in Table 4 of Appendix A. When set to a value
of 0, the Mirage will sample through it's internal filter and A/D converter. When set to
any other value, the Mirage will sample through the cartridge filter and A/D.

Data Manipulation

MASOS provides a set of eight functions which may be performed on any sound
data in the Mirage. To control what data is modified by these operations, some new
parameters have been created which act as pointers. A few of these parameters are
normally used to control the Sequencer, which has been removed from MASOS. The
values of these parameters are used by the routines which perform the data
manipulations and should always be set or checked before initiating any of the
functions accessed by the MASOS Function key. These operations act directly on the
data memory areas of the Mirage and are independent of Program and Wavesample
control parameter settings.

79

--- Page 83 ---

The following parameters are pointers which control the range of memory that will
be manipulated. Each pointer is made up of two numbers, which are both shown in
Hexadecimal. The first half of a pointer is the Page number and the second half is the
Sample number on that page.

[85] Source Start: page number (normally 00)
[86] Source Start: sample number (normally 00)
[87] Source End: page number (normally 01)
[88] Source End: sample number (normally FF)

[89] Destination Start: page number (normally 00)
[90] Destination Start:sample number (normally 00)

These pointers must be set before initiating any of the MASOS functions. The
values of the pointers are set on bootup to the defaults listed above and are not
changed by any of the functions.

[94] Destination Bank Select (normally LO)

This parameter selects the upper or lower sound memory bank as the place to
store the results of those MASOS function which require a destination.

[95] Scale Function Start Factor (normally 00)
[96] Scale Function End Factor (normally FF)

These scale factors are used to control the scaling of the sample data by the
Scaling Function. The range of both variables is from 00 to FF (Hex).

The loop should be turned off in any memory area being operated upon to avoid
inserting zeroes in the waveform data. Additionally, when the loop is off, the last
sixteen bytes (samples) of any wavesample are not waveform data, but are, instead,
zeroes used to halt the oscillators. These zeroes are always present and should not
be included when operating on a wavesample. Reversing a wavesample, including
these zeroes, will put zeroes at the beginning of the waveform data, causing erratic
results on playback. For this reason, always set the Source End (sample) [88] to EF,
not FF, if the Source End (page) [87] is the last page of the wavesample

80

--- Page 84 ---

MASOS Data Manipulation Functions

These special functions are accessed by pressing the MASOS Function key ,
then pressing the number which corresponds to the function to be performed. A
flashing mnemonic message will appear until you either press the ENTER key to
initiate the function, or the CANCEL key to abort it. When the requested function has
been completed, the "Fc" or Function Complete message will appear.

Function # Mnemonic

1 Cd
2 Fi
3 Fo
4 Sc
5 Ad
6 In
7 rd
8 rP

Description

Copy Data from Source to Destination.

Fade in from Source Start to Source End

Fade out from Source Start to Source End

Scale the Source data with a linear ramp function
which ramps between Scale Start Factor and
Scale End Factor.

Add Source data to Destination data; leave
result in Destination.

Invert the Source data.
Reverse data from Source Start to End

Replicate the first page of the Source
data on every page of the Source data.

Further information and graphical depictions of the MASOS functions can be
found starting on page 26 (MASOS DATA MANIPULATION FUNCTIONS) and
page 66 (Time Domain Manipulations).

81

--- Page 85 ---

APPENDIX C - MIRAGE MASOS MIDI IMPLEMENTATION 1.1

This is the Mirage MIDI implementation available after booting from the MASOS
disk. The Real Time messages are eliminated and additional commands are added to
support the MASOS functions when used with the Visual Editing System.

1.0 TRANSMIT DATA.

1.1 Channel Information.

status second third Description

1OOONNNN OKKKKKKK OVVVVVVV Note off: K[36..96], v[1..127].

1001NNNN OKKKKKKK OVVVVVVV Note on: K[36..96], v[1..127].

1011NNNN 01000000 01111111 Sustain pedal on (depressed). *1,*2

1011NNNN 01000000 00000000 Sustain pedal off (released). *1 ,*2

1011NNNN 00000001 OVVVVVVV Mod wheel amount: v[0..127]. *2

1110NNNN 00000000 OVVVVVVV Pitch bender: v[0..127]; v=64:center,
v=0:max flat, v=127:max sharp. *2

1.2 Notes

“1 Only sent if pedal is in Sustain Pedal Mode, parameter [89].
*2 Only sent if enabled by Midi Controller Enable, parameter [84].

On power up Mirage defaults to Omni on (mode 1)
and will transmit on Channel number 1 (NNNN=0).

Mirage is always in poly mode.
Mirage can be set to Omni off Poly mode (mode 3).
2.0 RECOGNIZED RECEIVE DATA.
2.1 Channel Information.
status second third Description

1O00NNNN OKKKKKKK OVVVVVVV Note off: K[36..96], v[1..127];
v=0 will be treated as v=64.

82

--- Page 86 ---

LOOILNNNN

1011NNNN

1011NNNN

LOLINNNN

LLiONNNN

LOLINNNN

1011NNNN

1011NNNN

1011NNNN

1011NNNN

2.2 Notes

OKKKKKKK

01000000

01000000

00000001

OXXXXXXX

01111011

01111100

01111101

01111110

01111111

OVVVVVVV

01111111

00000000

OVVVVVVV

OVVVVVVV

00000000

00000000

00000000

00000000

00000000

Note on: (v#0) K[36..96], v[1..127];
v=0 treated as note off with v=64.

Sustain pedal on (depressed).
Sustain pedal off (released).

Mod wheel amount: v[0..127]. *1
Pitch bender: v[0..127]; v=64:center,
v=0:max flat, v=127:max sharp. *1
X is ignored.

All notes off command. *2

Omni mode off. All notes off. *2
Omni mode on. All notes off. *2
Mono mode on. All notes off. *2
Mono mode off is ignored but

all notes are turned off.

Poly mode on. All notes off. *2

“1 Only recognized when enabled by Midi Controller Enable, parameter [84].
*2 These function as a key release for all notes. The notes will not
stop sounding instantly unless the envelope release is zero.

The Mirage powers up in Omni on, Poly mode. In this case,
channel data is recognized on all channels.

When the Mirage is in Omni off mode, channel data is only
recognized for the channel selected by the MIDI Channel

Select, parameter [82].

Controllers only affect notes played by MIDI key commands.

A MIDI Pitch Bend or Mod Wheel command will only affect notes
which sounded as a result of MIDI key commands. Notes played
on the local keyboard or from the sequencer will not be affected.

83

--- Page 87 ---

3.0 SYSTEM EXCLUSIVE FORMAT.
3.1 Receive Data.

3.1.1 Mirage Command Code (front panel commands).

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000001 Mirage command code.

ONNNNNNN Up to 5 bytes of front panel message

(Table 3.3). Must be a complete
message, i.e. terminated with
ENTER if the command requires it.

01111111 End of Command marker.

3.1.2 Program Dump Request.

This command instructs the Mirage to dump its current Programs
for the upper or lower keyboard.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.
O0OON0011 Program dump request;

N=0: lower, N=1:upper.

3.1.3 Configuration Parameters Dump Request.

This command instructs the Mirage to dump its current
configuration parameters.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000000 Configuration parameters dump request.

84

--- Page 88 ---

3.1.4 Wavesample Gump Request.

Used to ask the Mirage to dump the current wavesample as
selected by Wavesample Select, parameter [26].

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000100 Wavesample dump request.

3.1.5 Wavesample Dump Absolute Request.

Used to ask the Mirage to send waveform data from the absolute
addresses specified in the message.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage Code.

00001011 Wavesample dump absolute request.
OOONLLLL N=0: lower, N=1: upper.

OOOOLLLL LLLLLLLL = Low byte of start address.
OOOOHHHH

OOOOHHHEH HHHHHEHH = High byte of start address.
OCOOLLLL

OOOOLLLL LLLLLLLL = Low byte of end address.
OOOOHHHH

OOOOHHHH HHHHHHHH = High byte of end address.

3.1.6 Wavesample Dump Absolute Data.

Used to send or receive data to or from the Mirage
from the pointers passed in the message.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage Code.

00001100 Wavesample dump absolute data message.
OOONLLLL N=0: lower, N=1: upper.

OOCOLLLL LLLLLLLL = Low byte of start address.
OOOOHHHH

OOCOHHHH HHHHHHHH = High byte of start address.

85

--- Page 89 ---

OOOOLLLL

OOOOLLLL LLLLLLLL = Low byte of end address.
OOOOHHEH
OOOOHHHH HHHHHHHH = High byte of end address.

Each data byte sent as 2 nybbles with
the MS nybble clear. Low nybble is sent
first, i.e. OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.

oceccccc Checksum: formed as a modulo 128
add of all data nybbles plus the nybbles
of the start and end addresses.

3.1.7 Program Dump Data.

Used to send upper or lower programs to the Mirage.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ code.

00000001 Mirage code.

0O0ON0101 Program dump data message;

N= 0: lower,N=1: upper.

Program data (Table 3.4).

3.1.8 Wavesample Dump Data.

Used to transfer data into the currently selected wavesample on the Mirage.
Note: A Wavesample should not be transmitted and received simultaneously,
as this will have unpredictable results.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000110 Wavesample dump data message.
oooocccc Page count LS nybble.

ooo0o0cccc Page count MS nybble.

86

--- Page 90 ---

Each data byte sent as 2 nybbles with
the MS nybble clear. Low nybble is sent
first, i.e. OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.

occeccce Checksum: formed as a modulo 128
add of each nybble and the page count.
3.1.9 Perform Wavesample Manipulation Function Command.
Used to perform MASOS wavesample manipulation functions.

When the function is completed an acknowledge is transmitted
by the Mirage.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage Code.
00001111 Manipulation function command code.
OOONOFFF n=0: lower,N=1: upper.

FFF = Command function code. *1
OOOOLLLL Source Start address
OOOOLLLL LS nybble through MS nybble.
OOOOHHHH Address = HHHHHHHH LLLLLLLL.
OOOOHHHH
OOOOLLLL Source End address
OOOOLLLL LS nybble through MS nybble.
OOOOHHHEH Address = HHHHHEHH LLLLLLLL.
OOOOHHHH
OOOOFFFE Scale Start Factor (FFFFEEFE).
OOOOFFFF Always transmit whether used or not.
OOOOFFFE Scale End Factor (FFFFEFFE).
OOOOFFFF Always transmit whether used or not.
OOOOLLLL Destination Start address.
OOOOLLLL Always transmit whether used or not.
OOOOHHHE Address = HHHHHHHH LLLLLLLL.
OOONHHHH N=1: dest. upper, N=0: dest. lower.

87

--- Page 91 ---

3.1.10 Notes
*1 Function Code definitions:

0 = Copy Source to Destination.

1 = Scale Source according to Scale Factors.

2 = Add Source to Destination, place result in Destination.
3 = Invert Source.

4 = Reverse Source.

5 = Replicate Source page.

6 = Rotate Current Wavesample Left.

7 = Rotate Current Wavesample Right.

3.2 Transmit Data.
3.2.1 Program Parameter Message.

This message is sent whenever a parameter is changed from the front
panel on the Mirage. *1

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00001101 Program parameter message.
OOONOOPP N=0: lower, N=1: upper, PP=Program #.
OXXXXXXX Parameter #.

OO00O0VVWVV Value LS nybble.

OO000VVVV Value MS nybble.

3.2.2 Wavesample Parameter Message

This message is sent whenever a wavesample parameter is changed from
the front panel of the Mirage. *1

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00001110 Wavesample parameter message.
N=0: lower, N=1: upper.

OOONOSSS SSS = wavesample #.

OXXXXXXX Parameter #.

OO000VVWVV Value LS nybble.

OO000VVVV Value MS nybble.

88

--- Page 92 ---

3.2.3 Program Status Message.

Sent by Mirage when a Program number is changed from the front panel. *1

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000111 Program change status message.
OOONOOPP N=0: lower, N=1: upper, PP=Program #.

3.2.4 Wavesample Status Message.

Sent by Mirage when a new wavesample is selected
from the front panel. “1

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00001000 Wavesample status message.
OOONOSSS N=0: lower, N=1: upper,

SSS = wavesample #.

3.2.5 Wavesample Dump Received without Error (Ack).

Sent by the Mirage when the checksum of a received wavesample dump is
good. Also sent when a wavesample function is completed.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.

00001001 Wavesample Ack message.

3.2.6 Wavesample Dump Received with Error (Nak).

Sent by the Mirage when the checksum of a received wavesample dump is
bad.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.

00001010 Wavesample Nak message.

89

--- Page 93 ---

3.2.7 Program Dump Data.

Used to serd the upper or lower program from the Mirage.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ code.
00000001 Mirage code.

000N0101 Program dump message.

N=0: lower,N=1: upper.

Program data (Table 3.4)

sent as two nybbles with MS

nybble clear, low nybble first,

i.@., OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.
3.2.8 Configuration Dump Data.

Used to send the configuration parameters from the Mirage.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000010 Configuration dump data message.

Configuration dump data (Table 3.5)
sent as two nybbles with MS

nybble clear, low nybble first,

i.e., OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.

3.2.9 Wave Table Dump Data.

Used to send the current wavesample from the Mirage.
Note: A Wavesample should not be transmitted and received
simultaneously as this will have unpredictable results.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000110 Wave table dump message.
oeooocccc Page count LS nybble.

oooocccc Page count MS nybble.

Wavesample data

90

--- Page 94 ---

OCCCCCCC

3.2.10 Notes

sent as two nybbles with MS
nybble clear, low nybble first,
i.e., OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.

Checksum of wavesample dump.
Formed as a modulo 128 add of
the data nybbles and the page count.

“1 Only transmitted when enabled by External Computer Port Enable
parameter [91].

3.3 Keypad Number Decoding Table.

Hex Code Dec Code Key Label Hex Code Dec Code Key label
00 00 0/PROG 14 20 REC SEQ
01 01 1 15 21 PLAY SEQ
02 02 2 16 22 LOAD SEQ
03 03 3 17 23 SAVE SEQ
04 04 4 10 16 LOAD UPPER
05 05 5 11 17 LOAD LOWER
06 06 6 12 18 SAMPLE UPPER
07 07 7 13 19 SAMPLE LOWER
08 08 8 0c 12 PARAM
09 09 9 oD 13 VALUE
OA 10 ENTER/START OE 14 (UP ARROW)
OB 11 CANCEL/STOP OF 15 (DOWN ARROW)

3.4 Program Dump Table Format.

The Program dump contains eigth Wavesample Control Blocks, eight
Segment Lists and four Program Parameter Blocks. The data is transferred
in nybbles and reassembled to form a block of bytes.

Byte Offset

0
1
25
49
73

Length Description

1 Sound Rev Level

24 Wavesample Control Block 1
24 Wavesample Control Block 2
24 Wavesample Control Block 3
24 Wavesample Control Block 4

91

--- Page 95 ---

97 24 Wavesample Control Block 5

121 24 Wavesample Control Block 6
145 24 Wavesample Control Block 7
169 24 Wavesample Control Block 8
193 32 Segment List, Wavesample 1
225 32 Segment List, Wavesample 2
257 32 Segment List, Wavesample 3
289 32 Segment List, Wavesample 4
321 32 Segment List, Wavesample 5
353 32 Segment List, Wavesample 6
385 32 Segment List, Wavesample 7
417 32 Segment List, Wavesample 8
449 32 Segment List, spare

481 36 Parameter Block, Program 1
517 36 Parameter Block, Program 2
553 36 Parameter Block, Program 3
589 36 Parameter Block, Program 4

Total Length: 625 bytes

Wavesample Control Block Length: 24 bytes

Each Wavesample Control Block contains pointers which are used
internally by the Mirage operating system.

WARNING: no wavesample control parameters should be changed externally.
The Mirage perfroms internal housekeeping tasks when any of these values
are changed. Use front panel command equivalents to change them. Consider
these control blocks to be Read Only.

Byte Offset Parameter # Parameter Name Range
0 Sample Start Pointer
2 Sample End Pointer
4 Loop Start Pointer
6 Loop End Pointer
8 [65] Loop Switch 0.1
9 [67] Coarse Tune 0..7
10 [68] Fine Tune 0..255
11 [69] Relative Amplitude 0..63
12 [70] Relative Filter Freq. 0..198
13 [71] Maximum Filter Freq. 0..198
14 [72] Top Key 0..60
15 [60] Wavesample Start 0..FE
16 [61] Wavesample End 1..FF

92

--- Page 96 ---

17 [62] Loop Start 0..FE

18 [63] Loop End 1..FF

19 [64] Loop End Fine 0..FF

20 Free Run Flag 0..1

21 spare 3 bytes 0
Segment List Length: 32 bytes

The Segment List is a set of operating system variables which control the
digital oscillators.

As with the Wavesample Control Blocks, the Segment Lists should
not be changed externally and sent back to the Mirage.

Program Parameter Block Length: 36 bytes

Byte Offset Parameter # Parameter Name Range
0 [28] Mono Mode Switch 0..1
1 [31] LFO Frequency 0..99
2 [32] LFO Depth 0..99
3 [33] Osc Detune 0..99
4 [34] Osc Mix 0..252
5 [35] Mix Vel Sens. 0..124
6 [36] Filter Cutoff Freq. 0..198
7 [37] Resonance 0..160
8 [38] Filter Kybd Tracking 0..4
9 spare 0
10 [27] Initial Wavesample 0..7
14 [28] Mix Mode Switch 0..1
12 [40] A Filter Envelope 0..31
13 [41] P 0..31
14 [42] D 0..31
15 [43] S 0..31
16 [44] R 0..31
17 [45] Av 0..124
18 [46] Pv 0..124
19 [47] Dk 0..124
20 [48] Sv 0..124
24 [49] Rv 0..124
22 [50] A Amplitude Envelope 0.31
23 [51] P 0..31
24 [52] D 0..31
25 [53] S) 0..31
26 [54] R 0.31

--- Page 97 ---

27
28
29
30
31
32

3.5 Configuration Dump Table.

Byte Offset

OONODAAARWNM— CO

3.5.1 Notes

[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]

Parameter #

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]
[77]
[81]
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
[90]
[94]
[95]
[96]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[97]

Av 0..124
Pv 0..124
Dk 0..124
Sv 0..124
Rv 0..124
spare 4 bytes 0
Parameter Name Range
Dummy byte must be zero
Master Tune 0..99
Pitch Bender Range 0..34
Velocity Sensitivity 0..63
Upper/lower Balance 0..126
Program Link Switch 0..1
Sample Time Adjust 20..99
Input Filter Freq. 0..198
Mic/Line Switch 0.4
Sampling Threshold 0..126
Multisample Switch 0..1
Midi Omni-mode Flag 0..1
Midi Channel! 0..15
Midi Thru-mode switch  0..14
Midi Mod Enable Switch 0..1
Source Start MSB 0..255
Source Start LSB 0..255
Source End MSB 0..255
Source End LSB 0..255
Destination MSB 0..255
Destination LSB 0..255
Destination Bank 0..1
Scale Start Factor 0..255
Scale End Factor 0..255
External Comp. Switch  0..1
Baud Rate Switch 0.4
Cartridge Filter Freq. 0..25
Software Version 0..255
Spare 0..255

"1 All parameters with this mark are displayed divided by 2.
They must always have their least significant bit reset.

94

--- Page 98 ---

APPENDIX D - MIRAGE MIDI IMPLEMENTATION 1.1

This is the normal Mirage MIDI implementation which is available when the
Mirage is booted from a Sound Disk or Blank Formatted Diskette.

1.0 TRANSMIT DATA.
1.1 Channel Information.

status second hir Description
1000NNNN OKKKKKKK OVVVVVVV Note off: K[36..96], v[1..127].
1001NNNN OKKKKKKK OVVVVVVV Note on: x[36..96], v[1..127].
1011NNNN 01000000 01111111 Sustain pedal on (depressed). *1,*2
1011NNNN 01000000 00000000 Sustain pedal off (released). *1 ,*2
1011NNNN 00000001 OVVVVVVV Mod wheel amount: v[0..127]. *2

1110NNNN 00000000 OVVVVVVV Pitch bender: v[0..127]; v=64:center,
v=0:max flat, v=127:max sharp. *2

1011NNNN 01111011 00000000 All Notes Off, transmitted at end
of sequence.

1.2 Real Time Data

11111000 Timing clock sent when internal
seq. clock is selected or when MIDI
clock is selected and a MIDI clock is
received. Also sent when external
clock is selected and an external
clock occurs.

1.3 Notes

*1 Only sent if pedal is in Sustain Pedal Mode, parameter [89].
*2 Only sent if enabled by Midi Controller Enable, parameter [84].

On power up Mirage defaults to Omni on (mode 1)
and will transmit on Channel number 1 (NNNN=0).

Mirage is always in poly mode.
Mirage can be set to Omni off Poly mode (mode 3).

95

--- Page 99 ---

2.0 RECOGNIZED RECEIVE DATA.

2.1 Channel Information.

status

1O0ONNNN

1001NNNN

1011NNNN
101 1NNNN
1011NNNN

1L1L1LONNNN

1O01L1NNNN
1011NNNN
1011NNNN

1011NNNN

1LO11NNNN

second

OKKKKKKK

OKKKKKKK

01000000
01000000
00000001

OXXXXXXX

01111011
01111100
01111101

01111110

01111111

2.2 Real Time Data.

11111000

11111010

11111011

11111100

hir

OVVVVVVV

OVVVVVVV

01111111
00000000
OVVVVVVV

OVVVVVVV

00000000

00000000

00000000

00000000

00000000

96

Description

Note off: K[36..96], v[1..127];
v=0 will be treated as v=64.

Note on: (v#0) K[36..96], v[1..127];
v=0 treated as note off with v=64.

Sustain pedal on (depressed).
Sustain pedal off (released).

Mod wheel amount: v[0..127]. *1
Pitch bender: v[0..127]; v=64:center,
v=0:max flat, v=127:max sharp. *1
x is ignored.

All notes off command. *2

Omni mode off. All notes off. *2
Omni mode on. All notes off. *2
Mono mode on. All notes off. *2
Mono mode off is ignored but

all notes are turned off.

Poly mode on. All notes off. *2

Timing clock recognized when MIDI
clock is selected.

Start sequencer.
Continue sequencer.

Stop sequencer.

--- Page 100 ---

2.3 Notes

“1 Only recognized when enabled by Midi Controller Enable, parameter [84].
"2 These function as a key release for all notes. The notes will not
stop sounding instantly unless the envelope release is zero.

The Mirage powers up in Omni on, Poly mode. In this case,
channel data is recognized on all channels.

When the Mirage is in Omni off mode, channel data is only
recognized for the channel selected by the MIDI Channel
Select, parameter [82].

Controllers only affect notes played by MIDI key commands.

A MIDI Pitch Bend or Mod Wheel command will only affect notes

which sounded as a result of MIDI key commands. Notes played

on the local keyboard or from the sequencer will not be affected.
3.0 SYSTEM EXCLUSIVE FORMAT.

3.1 Receive Data.

3.1.1 Mirage Command Code (front panel commands).

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.
00000001 Mirage command code.

ONNNNNNN Up to 5 bytes of front panel message
. (Table 3.3). Must be a complete
message, i.e. terminated with
ENTER if the command requires it.

01111111 End of Command marker.

97

--- Page 101 ---

3.1.2 Program Dump Request.

This command instructs the Mirage to dump its current Programs
for the upper or lower keyboard.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.
0O0ON0011 Program dump request;

N=0: lower,N=1 ‘upper.

3.1.3 Wavesample Dump Request.

Used to ask the Mirage to dump the current wavesample as
selected by Wavesample Select, parameter [26].

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00000100 Wavesample dump request.

3.1.4 Program Dump Data.

Used to send upper or lower programs to the Mirage.

11110000 System Exclusive.

00001111 ENSONIQ code.

00000001 Mirage code.

000N0101 Program dump data message;

N= 0: lower,N=1: upper.

Program data (Table 3.4).

3.1.5 Wavesample Dump Data.
Used to transfer data into the currently selected wavesample on the Mirage.
Note: A Wavesample should not be transmitted and received simultaneously,
as this will have unpredictable results.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

98

--- Page 102 ---

00000001 Mirage code.

00000110 Wavesample dump data message.
oooocccc Page count LS nybble.

ooo0occcc Page count MS nybble.
Each data byte sent as 2 nybbles with
the MS nybble clear. Low nybble is sent
first, i.e. OOOOLLLL then OOOOHHHH.

occccccc Checksum: formed as a modulo 128
add of each nybble and the page count.

3.2 Transmit Data.
3.2.1 Wavesample Dump Received without Error (Ack).

Sent by the Mirage when the checksum of a received wavesample dump is
good. Also sent when a wavesample function is completed.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.
00000001 Mirage code.

00001001 Wavesample Ack message.

3.2.2 Wavesample Dump Received with Error (Nak).

Sent by the Mirage when the checksum of a received wavesample dump is
bad.

11110000 System Exclusive.
00001111 ENSONIQ Code.

00000001 Mirage code.

00001010 Wavesample Nak message.

99

--- Page 103 ---

3.3 Keypad Number Decoding Table.

Hex Code Dec Code Key Label

00
01
02

3.4 Program Dump Table Format.

Hex Code Dec Code Key label

O/PROG 14 20 RECSEQ

1 15 21. +PLAYSEQ

2 16 22  LOADSEQ

3 17 23. SAVE SEQ

4 10 16 LOAD UPPER

5 rf 17 LOADLOWER

6 12 18 | SAMPLE UPPER
7 13 19 SAMPLE LOWER
8 oc 12 PARAM

9 oD 13. VALUE
ENTER/START OE 14 (UPARROW)
CANCEL/STOP OF 15. (DOWN ARROW)

The Program dump contains eigth Wavesample Control Blocks, eight
Segment Lists and four Program Parameter Blocks. The data is transferred
in nybbles and reassembled to form a block of bytes.

Byte Ofiset

Length Description

Sound Rev Level
Wavesample Control Block 1
Wavesample Control Block 2
Wavesample Control Block 3
Wavesample Control Block 4
Wavesample Control Block 5
Wavesample Control Block 6
Wavesample Control Biock 7
Wavesample Control Block 8
Segment List, Wavesample 1
Segment List, Wavesample 2
Segment List, Wavesample 3
Segment List, Wavesample 4
Segment List, Wavesample 5
Segment List, Wavesample 6
Segment List, Wavesample 7
Segment List, Wavesample 8
Segment List, spare
Parameter Block, Program 1
Parameter Block, Program 2

100

--- Page 104 ---

553 36 Parameter Block, Program 3
589 36 Parameter Block, Program 4

Total Length: 625 bytes

Wavesample Control Block Length: 24 bytes

Each Wavesample Control Block contains pointers which are used
internally by the Mirage operating system.

WARNING: no wavesample contro! parameters should be changed externally.
The Mirage perfroms internal housekeeping tasks when any of these values
are changed. Use front panel command equivalents to change them. Consider
these contro! blocks to be Read Only.

Byte Offset Parameter # Parameter Name Range
0 Sample Start Pointer
2 Sample End Pointer
4 Loop Start Pointer
6 Loop End Pointer
8 [65] Loop Switch 0..1
9 [67] Coarse Tune 0..7
10 [68] Fine Tune 0..255
11 [69] Relative Amplitude 0..63
12 [70] Relative Filter Freq. 0..198
13 [71] Maximum Filter Freq. 0..198
14 [72] Top Key 0..60
15 [60] Wavesample Start 0..FE
16 [61] Wavesample End 1..FF
17 [62] Loop Start 0..FE
18 [63] Loop End 1..FF
19 [64] Loop End Fine 0..FF
20 Free Run Flag 0..4
21 spare 3 bytes 0

Segment List Length: 32 bytes

The Segment List is a set of operating system variables which control the
digital oscillators.

As with the Wavesample Control Blocks, the Segment Lists should
nat be changed externally and sent back to the Mirage.

101

--- Page 105 ---

Program Parameter Block

Byte Offset

OANONAWNH-O

Parameter #

[28]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[27]
[28]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]

Length: 36 bytes
Parameter Name

Mono Mode Switch
LFO Frequency
LFO Depth

Osc Detune

Osc Mix

Mix Vel Sens.
Filter Cutoff Freq.
Resonance

Filter Kybd Tracking
spare

Initial Wavesample
Mix Mode Switch
A Filter Envelope
P

D

iS)

R

Av

Pv

Dk

Sv

Rv

A Amplitude Envelope
P

D

S

R

Av

Pv

Dk

Sv

Rv

spare 4 bytes

102

Range

ocoeogpofp ee SC DOS DOO DDO DDD DOOD BO SODOOSOCO

124
124
31
31
31
31
31
124
124
124
124
124

--- Page 106 ---

APPENDIX E - MASOS PARAMETER SETTINGS

The following three charts give a complete list of all relevant parameter settings
for the three sound templates on the MASOS disk. The first sound provides two
equal-sized Wavesamples per keyboard half. The second sound provides four
Wavesamples per half and the third provides eight wavesamples per half.

These charts can be used as a reference for creating your own sounds using the
fourth blank template chart provided. You can make copies of this fourth chart and fill
in your own numbers and notes for any sounds you sample. It is always a good idea to
note what sample rate and input filter setting you used in sampling a sound, for future
reference.

The Programs provided on these templates are all the same, giving “plain vanilla"
envelopes and filtering for minimum effect on the sound. A small amount of velocity
sensitivity is provided on the envelopes to get you started and all other special effects
(chorusing, etc.) are disabled.

Note that the blank template form has no provisions for filling in those parameters
that are part of the system configuration. It is assumed that settings for pitch-bend,
MIDI, Sequencer, etc. have all been set by you and saved using the Save
Configuration command.

103

--- Page 107 ---

= Creator:

Mirage Sound Name:
Programmer MASOS Lower 1
Reference

Date: 4/3/85

PROGRAM fom WAVESAMPLE
- 2 3 4! 12345678

CORE [27] Init Wavesample
oft | ott | ot [oft] [28] Mix Mode
| oft | off | off | off | [29] Mono Mode

[69] Rel. Amplitude
| | [| f jrvojeet. Fitter Freq.
| {| | | Jf?71]Max. Filter Freq.

| |

This Template provides two Wavesamples per
keyboard half, with minimal filtering and velocity
response.

[53] Sustain
[54] Release
[55] Attack Ys Settings for unused Wayesamples are ignored.
21 i be sy The Upper setti re identical to these with these
je Up ettings are i ical to i
| 90 | [57] Decay Kyb exceptions: Top Key of Wavesample 1 =46
Top Key of Wayesample 2 =61
Relative Filter Freq. =10

All Programs are identical.

[59] Release Ys

--- Page 108 ---

= Creator:
ensoaniag) || 1
Mirage Sound Name:
Programmer MASOS Lower 2
Reference

Date: 4/3/85
pPROGRAMS pum WAVES AMPLE

123 4 12345678
[01] 01] 01[ 01] [27] Init Wavesample |[oo[4o[so[co| | | | |[60]Wavesample Start
| off | off | ott | off | [28] Mix Mode 3F7F[BFlre] | | | | [61] Wavesample End
| off | oft | off | off

[29] Mono Mode
[se7e|BelFe] | | | |{62]Loop Start
[3€ | 7E[BE| FE | | |

[31] LFO Freq
[32] LFO Depth
[33] Osc 2 Detune
[34] Osc Mix

[35] Osc Mix Yel Sens fo4]oslos]oa] | | | |
[36] Filter Cutoff Freq | 80| 80] 80] 80]
| 00| [37] Filter Resonance |[63|63|63 | 63 | _|[69]Rel. Amplitude

| 04 | [38] Filter Kyod Track |[30[30 [30] | _|[70]Rel. Filter Freq,
Filter Envelope ||

| | [73] Sample Time Adj.
| | [74] Input Filter Freq

Notes:

This Template provides four Wayvesamples per
keyboard half. The notes for MASOS Lower 1 apply.

The Upper settings are identical to the Lower with

these exceptions: Top Key of Wavesample 1 = 39
Top Key of Wavesample 2 =46
Top Key of Wavesample 3 =54
Top Key of Wavesample 4 = 61
Relative Filter Freq. =10

--- Page 109 ---

Creator:

ensonia

Mirage
Programmer
Reference
PROGRAM
ry 2 3 4)

| 01] 01] 01] 01] [27] Init Wavesample
ott | ott [ott ort | [28] Mix Mode
| off | off | off | off | [29] Mono Mode

Sound Name:
MASOS Lower3
Date: 4/3/85
pom WAYESAMPLE
12345678

| 00] 20] 40] 60] 80/ao|coleo| [60] Wavesample Start

[iF | 3 [SF] 7] 9F [BF [OF] FF][61] Wavesample End
[3 |5€|7€ | 9€[6e]DE[Fe|[62]Loop Start

[3€|5E| 7 | 9E|BE|DE| FE|[63] Loop End

[FF FF FF | FFI FE FF FF [64] Loop End Fine Adj.
oft | oft [oft

101] 01| [35] Osc Mix Vel Sens [04 | 04]
1451 45| 45] 45| [36] Filter Cutoff Freq | 80| 80|
63 |

| 00] 00] 00 | 00| [37] Filter Resonance [63 [63 | 6363 [63 | 63 [63 |[ 69] Rel. Amplitude
[os [os [os [os] [38] Fi 0 [30

[99 | 99
joe |12 |

[46] Peak Ys

[47] Decay Kyb
[48] Sustain Vs
[49] Release Ys

[50] Attack This Template provides eight Wayesamples per

[51] Peak

[52] Decay
[53] Sustain
[54] Release
[55] Attack Vs
[56] Peak Ys
[$7] Decay Kyb
[58] Sustain Vs

[59] Release Ys

keyboard half. The notes for MASOS Lower 1 apply.

The Upper settings are identical to the Lower with
these exceptions: Top Key of Wavesample 1 =35
Top Key of Wayesample 2 =39
Top Key of Wavesample 3 =43
Top Key of Wavesample 4 =46
Top Key of Wavesample 1 =50
Top Key of Wavesample 2 =54
Top Key of Wavesample 3 =58

Top Key of Wayesample 4 =61
Relative Filter Freq. =10

--- Page 110 ---

Creator:
lensonial TL : Th

Mi Irage
Programmer
Reference

Sound Name:

Date:

os a! eon oe ae

23 4

3456
[27] Init Wavesample PEE Hear Start
[28] Mix Mode [61] Wavesample End
[29] Mono Mode
[62]Loop Start
[31] LFO Freq [63]Loop End
[32] LFO Depth [64] Loop End Fine Adj.

[33] Osc 2 Detune [65]Loop Switch
[34] Osc Mix

[35]OscMixVelSensj[ | ] [ [| [ [| | |[67)Rel. Tuning Coarse
[36] Filter Cutoff Freq jf | | | | | | | |[68}Rel. Tuning Fine
[37] Filter Resonance || | [| |] | | [| | |[69]Rel. Amplitude
[38] Filter Kyod Track [ [| [ | TT [ [ |pvojret . Filter Freq.

Filter Envelope

[40] Atack CCE rater key

[41] Peak

[42] Decay [73] Sample Time Adj.
[43] Sustain [74] Input Filter Freq
[44] Release [75] Line/Mic Input

[45] Attack Ys [76] Sampling Threshold
[46] Peak Ys

ae Decay Kyb [TT LL LL [_ |notecritch) Sampled

Sustain Ys

vale Release Ys
Amplitude Envelope

[50] Attack

[51] Peak

[52] Decay

[53] Sustain

[54] Release

[55] Attack Vs

[56] Peak Ys

[57] Decay Kyb

[$8] Sustain Ys

[59] Release Vs

--- Page 111 ---

INDEX

Analog-to-Digital Q-Chip, 53
Converter (A/D), 6 Quantization, 53-54
Aliasing, 6, 34, 49, 51-53
Compressor, 23, 65 Relative Amplitude, 20, 45, 46
Cross-fade, 46, 68 Relative Filter Freq, 20, 45

Relative Tuning, 19
Digital to Analog

Converter (D/A), 6 Signal Processing, 66-69
Data Format, 65 Short Loops, 36, 57-60
Digital Oscillator, 2 Sample Rate, 46, 49-51, 58, 60, 61, 69, 70-73
Distortion, 34 Sampling, 5,7,22
Detune, 10 Sample Time Adjust, 22,33, 70-73
Split Point, 13
Envelopes, 4,20,63-65
Equalization, 62-63 Top Key, 12
External Input Table Look-up Alias, 53
Filter Frequency, 22,79 Tape Recorder, 60
Templates, 29, 35
Filter, 4,20 Truncation, 44

Fourier Analysis, 69
Visual Editing System, 8

Initial Wavesample, 14, 16 Voice, 2
Input, 29-30
Input Filter, 8, 34, 49 Wavesamples, 3
-Frequency, 22,74-76, 79 -Copy, 26
Input Sampling Filter -Keyboard Assignment, 12, 39-41
Cartridge, 80 -Operations, 24
-Rotate, 24
Keyboard Wavesample -Selecting, 9
Assignment, 12, 39-41 -Start/End, 17
LFO, 4

Line/Mic Level Input, 23
Looping, 18, 36, 54-60

MASOS, 8, 9, 25-28, 29, 77-81
-Functions, 26-28, 46-48, 66-68, 79-81
Maximum Filter

Frequency, 20
Memory Allocation, 17, 42-43
MIDI, 82-102
Mix, 3, 10-11
Mix-mode, 4, 10, 13, 15
Multisampling, 15, 23, 38

Nyquist Frequency, 50

Parodoxical Aphorism, 8

--- Page 112 ---


